<<<PAGE 1>>>
Study Protocol
Title: Effects of Heart Rate Oscillations During
Meditation on Plasma Biomarkers of Alzheimer's
Disease
NCT number: NCT06210035
IRB approval date: 5/25/2023
Uploaded date: 10/27/2025
<<<PAGE 2>>>
Research Background
Cross-sectional studies suggest that meditation practices are associated with slower
brain aging and improvements in early biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Most research has focused on
the mental training aspects of meditation (e.g., paying attention to the present moment)
and linked them to health outcomes. By contrast, the physiological changes that occur
during meditation (e.g., heart rate oscillations, breathing rate) and their influence on
health outcomes have been largely overlooked.
During some meditative practices, breathing slows down, which induces large
oscillations in heart rate at the breathing frequency. In our previous HRV-ER trial
(NCT03458910), a 4-week daily intervention designed to induce high-amplitude heart
rate oscillations via slow-paced breathing significantly reduced plasma amyloid beta
(Aβ)42 and Aβ40 levels associated with AD.
Research Objectives
Based on our prior findings, the present study aims to separate out the mental training
and physiological aspects of meditation to better understand their differential effects on
plasma Aβ levels. We will examine how two types of meditation practices (with or
without slow breathing) affect plasma Aβ levels compared with a no-intervention control
group. We will also assess the effects of these practices on emotional well-being, given
that various types of meditation improve well-being.
Healthy adults aged 18-35 who meet all eligibility criteria will be invited to this study.
Participants will be asked to engage in one week of daily meditation practice or no-
intervention control task at home. They will also be asked to visit the lab twice, once
before and once after the intervention, to provide blood samples to assess plasma Aβ
levels and to complete emotion questionnaires and memory tests.
<<<PAGE 3>>>
Methods and Design
Lab Visit 1 (around 1.5 hours)
1) Consent
At the beginning of this visit, the researchers will provide detailed information about
the study. Participants will then be asked to sign the consent form on DocuSign.
When they sign, participants will have the opportunity to download a copy of the
signed consent form for their record.
2) Administer questionnaires
Participants will be asked to complete the following questionnaires at the Emotion &
Cognition Lab:
• Profile of Mood States (POMS)
• Depression Anxiety Stress Scales – Short Form (DASS-21)
• Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire
• Demographic information
3) Blood draw
Phlebotomists will collect blood samples up to 30 mL via venipuncture. Note that
blood draw volume for blood donation in the US is 1 pint (~450 mL); thus, 30 mL
should be safe for participants. Fasting is not required for the blood draw.
4) Measure resting heart rate
Give the participant devices and explain how to use them. The devices include a
laptop with a customized meditation app, USB-module and an ear sensor that clips
onto the earlobe and measures heart rate.1). Using the devices, the participant will
be asked to measure their heart rate for 5 min. During the 5-min resting state, they
will be asked to sit in a chair with palms up, both feet flat on the floor, back straight,
knees 90-degree angle, and closed eyes.
5) Paced breathing
Next, the app will ask participant to do 5 minutes of paced breathing at 15 breaths
per minute by following audio cues. The participant will be asked to inhale when the
ball ascends and exhale when it descends. This controlled breathing at around a
normal breathing pace will allow us to assess baseline individual differences in heart
rate spectral frequency with breathing rates controlled.
6) Intervention instructions
The app will randomly assign participant to one of the three conditions (belly-focus
concentration meditation, belly-focus concentration meditation with slow breathing,
no-intervention control). The experimenter will go over the instructions below and
have them try the assigned practice for 20 minutes.
Instructions for the belly-focus meditation:
<<<PAGE 4>>>
the belly. Please remember that it is normal for the mind to wander. When this
happens, gently bring your attention back to your belly.”
belly to contract
• Notice the sensations around the belly as the breath comes in and out.  As
your breath flows in, feel it move down into your belly. Please observe how
gently back to the sensations in the belly.
• Whatever sensations arise, just observing. Observe how long the sensation
• It’s quite normal for the mind to wander, if and when you notice your mind
wandering, gently bring your attention back to the sensations of breath in the
belly right here and now, what sensations are present?
sensations of breath and the belly. Moment to moment what sensations are
<<<PAGE 5>>>
Instructions for the belly-focus meditation with slow breathing:
the belly. You will also be asked to breathe slowly during the entire meditation
session. Please remember that it is normal for the mind to wander. When this
happens, gently bring your attention back to the upper lip area.”
belly to contract.
• Take long slow breaths as I guide you. Inhale for a count to 5 and exhale for a
count to 5. Breathe slowly and gently at this pace during the entire meditation
exercise. I’ll count with you for the first few breaths. Then you can count on
your own. Inhale, 2, 3, 4, 5, exhale 2, 3, 4, 5. Inhale, 2, 3, 4, 5, exhale 2, 3, 4,
5. Continue breathing this way on your own.
• Notice sensations around the belly as the air moves in and out. As your
breath flows in, feel it move down into your belly. Please observe how
gently back to the sensations in the belly. Remember to breathe slowly and
gently for a count of 5 while inhaling and a count of 5 while exhaling.
<<<PAGE 6>>>
• Whatever sensations arise, just observing.  Observe how long the sensation
Remember to breathe slowly and gently for a count of 5 for each inhalation
and a count of 5 for each exhalation during the remaining session.
• It is normal for the mind to wander, if and when you notice your mind
wandering, gently bring your attention back to the sensations in the belly right
here and now, what sensations are present? Remember to breathe slowly
and gently.
sensations of breath and the belly.  Moment to moment what sensations are
Instructions for the no-intervention control condition:
The app will show, “You will be asked to sit quietly for 20 minutes while your heart
rate is recorded. Please feel free to do whatever you would like to do (e.g., use your
phone or computer, read a book, watch TV, listen to music) as long as your activity
does not involve head motion.”
Before each practice session, participants in all conditions will view 6 images from
the Nencki Affective Picture System (NAPS; uploaded on section 21.2) and rate
them on a scale of 1-9 (1 = very negative to 9 = very positive, with 5 = neutral). At
the post-intervention lab visit (i.e., Lab Visit 2), they will be given memory tests for
these images (see below for more details).
One week intervention at home
Participants will be asked to engage in the assigned practice for 40 minutes (20 min x
two times) each day for a week.
Lab Visit 2 (around 1 hour)
Participants will be asked to return their devices and complete the assessments listed in
Lab Visit 1 Steps 2-5. In addition, participants will complete a free recall test in which
they will describe as many images as they can that were viewed right before each
meditation practice in the past week. They will also complete a recognition memory test
in which they will be given 3 response options for each image; Remember, Know and
New (Remember = “I vividly remember,” Know = “I have a sense of familiarity with the
image, New = the image was not seen before”).