<<<PAGE 1>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
1
Protocol for
Falls: a marker of preclinical Alzheimer's disease
Stark, Susan*, Ances, Beau M., Xiong, Chengjie, Balota, David, Bollinger, Rebecca, Somerville, Emily,
Thompson, Regina, Grant, Elizabeth, Morris, John
*To whom correspondence should be addressed
Washington University School of Medicine
5232 Oakland Ave
St. Louis, MO 63110
Version: 1.31
Updated December 9, 2024
<<<PAGE 2>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
2
Protocol modification log
Date Version Description
12.26.18 1.1 Modified personnel and updated assessments
01.16.19 1.2 Updated personnel and assessments
02.15.19 1.3 Modified exclusion criteria; added phone option for some assessments
03.05.19 1.4 Addition of sensation assessment
05.08.19 1.5 Addition of optional stool sample collection
07.30.19 1.6 Addition of UPSIT test and re-consent item
11.22.19 1.7 Addition of dietary questionnaire and GI questionnaire for stool sample assessment;
updated personnel
02.28.20 1.8 Addition of hearing screen, questionnaires, and updated personnel
03.24.20 1.9 Addition of coronavirus (COVID-19) changes
04.17.20 1.10 Added telehealth and coronavirus (COVID-19) assessments
05.20.20 1.11 Added procedures to re-consent and mail stool kits during coronavirus pandemic
07.28.20 1.12 Added consent via REDCap and edited inclusion criteria
10.27.20 1.13 Updated formatting, personnel, and references
01.26.21 1.14 Updated stool collection portion only
03.17.21 1.15 Updated remote/telehealth procedures, COVID-19 diagnoses and symptoms
06.01.21 1.16 Updated stool collection portion for olfaction
10.08.21 1.17 Updated personnel
01.25.22 1.18 Addition of MoCA & AD8
02.08.22 1.19 Updated stool procedures
02.16.22 1.20 Updated staff roles and responsibilities
06.09.22 1.21 Addition of DS supplement
07.15.22 1.22 Addition of social media as a recruitment source for DS supplement
07.27.22 1.23 Addition of EPIC as recruitment source for DS supplement
08.03.22 1.24 Addition of Volunteer for Health as recruitment source for DS supplement
10.31.22 1.25 Modified number of monthly fall calls for DS supplement
12.08.22 1.26 Modified length of time for monthly fall calls for DS supplement
05.12.23 1.27 Updated MoCA Information
06.02.23 1.28 Updated AD8 and MoCA Information
08.04.23 1.29 Modified DS supplement recruitment sources
10.20.23 1.30 Added information about sharing de-identified data for DS supplement
10.31.23 1.31 Added additional information about sharing de-identified data for DS supplement
12.09.24 1.32 Addition of Opal wearable sensors for select in-home assessments
<<<PAGE 3>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
3
Co-Authors: Susan Stark, PhD, OTR/L
Program in Occupational Therapy
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
Beau M. Ances, MD, PhD, MSc
Department of Neurology
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
Chengjie Xiong
Division of Biostatistics
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
David Balota, PhD
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences and Neurology
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
John Morris, MD
Department of Neurology
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
Rebecca Bollinger, OTD, OTR/L
Program in Occupational Therapy
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
Regina Thompson
Department of Neurology
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
Elizabeth Grant, PhD
Division of Biostatistics
Washington University School of Medicine
St. Louis, Missouri
Selena E. Washington, PhD, MSPH, OTR/L (DS supplement)
Department of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy
Saint Louis University
St. Louis, Missouri
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION DATA SET
<<<PAGE 4>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
4
Primary Registry and
Trial Identifying
Number
N/A
Date of Registration  N/A
Secondary Identifying
Numbers
IRB ID#: 201807135
Source(s) of Monetary
Support
National Institute on Aging
Paula and Rodger Riney Fund (stool portion only)
Primary Sponsor
Program in Occupational Therapy, Washington University School of
Medicine in St. Louis, MO
Secondary Sponsor(s)
N/A
Contact for Public
Queries
Susan Stark, PhD, OTR/L
sstark@wustl.edu
314-273-4114
Department of Occupational Therapy
Washington University School of Medicine
5232 Oakland Ave
St. Louis, MO 63110
United States
Contact for Scientific
Queries
Susan Stark, PhD, OTR/L
sstark@wustl.edu
314-273-4114
Department of Occupational Therapy
Washington University School of Medicine
5232 Oakland Ave
St. Louis, MO 63110
United States
Public Title Falls: a marker of preclinical Alzheimer's disease
Scientific Title Falls: a marker of preclinical Alzheimer's disease
Countries of
Recruitment
United States
Health Condition(s) or
Problem(s) Studied
Falls and preclinical AD
Intervention(s)
N/A
Key Inclusion and
Exclusion Criteria
Participants will include cognitively normal (CN) older adults currently
enrolled in longitudinal studies of memory and aging at the Knight ADRC.
Participants are community-dwelling individuals recruited from the greater
St. Louis, MO., metropolitan area. Individuals with a medical or psychiatric
illness that could interfere with longitudinal follow-up, prevent participation in
neuroimaging, or adversely affect cognition are excluded.
<<<PAGE 5>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
5
Study Type
Longitudinal cohort study
Assignment: N/A
Primary purpose: To examine the relationship between falls and
functional mobility in preclinical stages of Alzheimer disease (AD)
Date of First
Enrollment
March 2019
Target Sample Size 350
Recruitment
Status
Enrolling
Primary Outcome(s)
Aim 1: To examine the relationship between falls and functional mobility in
preclinical stages of AD.
a) We hypothesize that CN individuals in preclinical Stages 2 and 3 will
have more falls (number and severity) and more impaired functional
mobility compared to CN individuals in Stages 0 and 1. We propose
that assessment of falls and functional mobility will provide a “real-
life” evaluation of preclinical AD.
b) We hypothesize that the rate of change in falls and impaired
functional mobility will be greater in CN older adults who
subsequently develop symptomatic AD compared to CN individuals
who do not develop AD.
Aim 2: To examine a hypothesized model of central and peripheral
mechanism(s) underlying falls and functional mobility in preclinical stages of
AD.
a) We hypothesize that a loss of connections within and between brain
networks underlies declines in the central (neuropsychological
performance) and peripheral (balance, strength, vision, and
sensation) nervous system changes that occur in preclinical AD.
b) We hypothesize that an interaction of both central and peripheral
mechanisms will underlie a loss of falls and functional mobility.
<<<PAGE 6>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
6
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Susan Stark, PhD, MSOT, OTR/L, Principal Investigator
Dr. Stark will jointly oversee the activities of this project with Dr. Ances. She will explore the transition of
the role of falls in asymptomatic, preclinical stages of Alzheimer disease (AD; Aim 1). Dr. Stark will
manage all recruitment and retention, all personnel in the field, and the prospective collection of fall data.
She will conduct staff training, weekly staff meetings, and quarterly investigator meetings. Dr. Stark will
draft manuscripts and present data at national and international conferences.
Dr. Stark will serve as contact PI and will assume fiscal and administrative management including
maintaining communication with other team members through monthly meetings. She will directly
supervise Dr. Bollinger and a post-doctoral associate to be named. She will work with Dr. Ances to
coordinate all aspects of the study including analysis of data and generation of manuscripts.
Beau M. Ances, MD, PhD, MSc, Principal Investigator
Dr. Ances will serve as the chair of the steering committee. He will directly supervise research
coordinators and will work with post-doctoral fellows in the analysis of neuroimaging data.
Chengie Xiong, PhD, Co-Investigator
Dr. Xiong oversees all of the data from the longitudinal studies that we will access for the analyses we
have planned for this study. Dr. Xiong will supervise all statistical analyses for this study. He will review
and supervise new data-entry screen development for this study. He will serve on the steering committee
and will contribute to manuscripts, presentations, and preparation of a subsequent application. Dr. Xiong
will also supervise the work of data manager Dr. Grant.
David Balota, PhD, Co-Investigator
Dr. Balota will supervise the collection of all neuropsychological data by Research Coordinator Ms.
Thompson. He will interpret cross-sectional and longitudinal neuropsychological evaluations of all of the
participants who will be recruited for this study. Dr. Balota will contribute to manuscripts, presentations,
and preparation of a subsequent application.
John Morris, MD, Co-Investigator
As the leader of the Knight ADRC, he will facilitate access to study participants and integrate the study
into ongoing workflow and procedures to ensure seamless integration of the proposed study into ongoing
studies. He will contribute to manuscripts, presentations, and preparation of a subsequent application. He
will serve on the steering committee and will act as arbitrator as needed.
Rebecca Bollinger, OTD, OTR/L, Study Coordinator
Dr. Bollinger will coordinate all aspects of the research project, including scheduling, managing visits and
mailings, reviewing data files for completeness, and maintaining consent forms and institutional review
board approval. She will process all participant payments. She will work closely with both PIs and Knight
ADRC staff to identify potential participants and will coordinate a consent visit in conjunction with the
potential participant’s annual assessment. She will serve as point of contact for participants monthly (for
reporting falls) and will employ strategies to improve retention (e.g., mailing birthday cards). She will
attend quarterly meetings at the Knight ADRC (required for all studies accessing Knight ADRC
participants). She will schedule and coordinate all in-home visits. She will complete home visits. She will
create, schedule, and coordinate the distribution of fall calendars. She will schedule and conduct all
follow-up interviews. Dr. Bollinger will work closely with Regina Thompson and the Knight ADRC staff to
ensure that the study is integrated and seamless for participants. Under the guidance of Dr. Grant, Dr.
Bollinger will be responsible for entering the in-home assessment results into a REDCap database and for
recording the visit in the Knight ADRC REDCap database. She will meet weekly with Drs. Ances, Stark,
Balota, and Ms. Thompson to ensure that project deadlines are met.
<<<PAGE 7>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
7
Regina Thompson, Clinical Research Coordinator II
She will assist Dr. Bollinger in identifying and recruiting potential participants seen at the Knight ADRC.
Ms. Thompson will work in tandem with Dr. Bollinger to obtain written informed consent from participants.
Along with Dr. Bollinger and under the guidance of Dr. Grant, Ms. Thompson will enter
neuropsychological data into the database. She will maintain regular communication with Dr. Ances to
ensure the proper and timely collection, upload, and quality control of all neuroimaging data. She will
serve as a key liaison among the neuroimaging, occupational therapy, and biostatistics teams that will
contribute to this project. She will meet weekly with Drs. Ances, Stark, and Balota as well as Drs. Bollinger
to ensure that project deadlines are met, and she will serve as a liaison among all study staff and the
Steering Committee.
Occupational Therapists/Occupational Therapy Assistants:
Debbie Lewis, MOT, OTR/L
Audrey Keleman, OTR/L
Meghan Haxton, COTA/L
Emily Somerville, OTD, OTR/L
They will conduct home visits as needed under the direction of Dr. Bollinger.
Graduate Assistants:
They will assist with stool sample collection and data analysis under the direction of Ms. Thompson and
Dr. Bollinger.
Data Management:
Elizabeth Grant, PhD, Research Statistician
Responsibilities include: Statistical design of study; data verification; developing and implementing data
management procedures including the data flow and procedures for data entry, error identification, and
correction; and preparing quarterly reports on enrollment, participant status (e.g., withdrawals), adverse
events, and independent safety monitoring body reports.
Stool Analysis:
Ibrahima Ndao, MD, Clinical Research Specialist
Carla Hall-Moore, BS, Research Lab Manager
Kimberley Sukhum, PhD, Postdoctoral Research Associate
Aura Ferreiro, BS, Graduate Research Assistant
Responsibilities include: Collection, processing, and analysis of optional annual stool samples.
DS supplement:
Selena Washington, MPH, PhD, OTR/L, Trainee
For the DS supplement, Dr. Washington will manage all recruitment and retention and the prospective
collection of fall data. She will schedule and complete all home visits, distribute calendars, and serve as
point of contact for participants to report falls monthly. Dr. Washington will continue to work closely with
the parent study staff (Stark, Ances, and Bollinger) and the ABC-DS study/Ances clinical staff (Ances,
Westerhaus, and Nelson). She will draft manuscripts and present outcomes at local, national, and
international conferences.
<<<PAGE 8>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
8
Abstract
Conversion to symptomatic Alzheimer disease (AD) is not an immediate process; rather, it develops slowly
over a series of preclinical stages. Although symptomatic AD is characterized by progressive cognitive
problems, growing evidence suggests that functional mobility abnormalities and an increase in falls may
precede cognitive impairment. Falls are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the older adult population.
Older AD patients have more than twice the risk of falls compared to the general population. Measures of
everyday function are currently not included in the evaluation of cognitively normal individuals with preclinical
AD. Within a well-characterized cohort of older, cognitively normal individuals (≥65 years old) who are followed
by the Knight Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, we will perform longitudinal in-home assessments to
quantitatively evaluate falls and functional mobility. We hypothesize that brain neuropathology (e.g., the
presence of amyloid and/or tau proteins, evidence of neurodegeneration) lead to changes in functional
connectivity of brain networks. These brain network changes affect both central nervous system markers (e.g.,
cognitive performance) and peripheral nervous system markers (e.g., balance, strength, vision, and sensation).
We suggest that a synergistic interaction between central and peripheral changes leads to altered functional
mobility, resulting in an increase in falls. Our findings will advance the field of AD by identifying novel “real-
world” biomarkers in preclinical stages of AD. Assessment of falls and gait instability in the home setting could
potentially serve as an inexpensive and non-invasive screening tool to identify individuals at greatest risk for
conversion to symptomatic AD. This may have important implications for the timing of interventions in
secondary prevention trials in AD.
DS supplement:
Adults aging with Down syndrome (DS) are at high risk for the development of Alzheimer’s disease
(AD).1 Nearly all adults with DS develop the neuropathological features of preclinical AD by the age of 40
years.1 Similar to the cognitively normal adult population, there is also an urgent need to understand the
preclinical and early phases of AD progression within the adult population aging with DS. It is hypothesized
that brain neuropathology (e.g., the presence of amyloid, tau proteins, and neurodegeneration) leads to
changes in functional connectivity of brain networks and that a synergistic interaction between central and
peripheral changes leads to altered functional mobility, resulting in an increase in falls.2 While individuals with
DS have a higher rate of falls, it remains unknown when falls occur in the progression to AD within adults with
DS.3,4 There is a need to expand the research to include functional measures such as falls, fall risk, and
functional mobility.5 Falls and functional mobility are associated with clinical measures of cognition and may be
a non-cognitive behavioral biomarker of AD.3,6,7 A better understanding of function could inform this biomarker
profile through a direct and less invasive method of assessment, therefore reducing burden for both the
participant and caregivers.1,3,8
Currently, the Alzheimer's Biomarkers Consortium — Down Syndrome (ABC-DS), of which WUSM is a
site, is contributing to the largest U.S.-based, multisite, biomarker initiative to target preclinical AD in the DS
population. The measures collected by the consortium include clinical, cognitive, and AD measures.3
This study will follow a cohort of community-dwelling adults with DS currently participating in the ABC-DS study
at WUSM, and aging adults with DS within the greater St. Louis metropolitan area. It will serve as the
necessary groundwork for a larger study related to falls and preclinical AD. This study will quantitatively
examine falls and functional mobility among adults aging with DS and their relationship with preclinical AD;
these measures could potentially serve as a method to screen people aging with DS for AD pathology and lead
to a better understanding of functional and cognitive changes that occur within this population.
<<<PAGE 9>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
9
Background
This proposal will systematically characterize cerebral network dysfunction, functional mobility, and falls in a
cohort of cognitively normal (CN) older adults (≥65 years old) with and without preclinical Alzheimer disease
(AD). In doing so, we explore the novel hypothesis that falls are an indicator of preclinical AD. Falls are the
leading cause of injury, long-term disability, premature institutionalization, and injury related-death in older
individuals.9-12 AD patients have a 60%-80% increased risk of falls.13 This risk is more than twice that of the
general population.14 Functional mobility, or the ability to navigate safely in the real world, is a complex task
that requires an interplay amongst attention, executive, motor, and sensory processing. Declining functional
mobility (gait and balance) and consequential falls15 may be a bellwether of loss of integration in the central
and peripheral nervous systems.16,17
Conversion from preclinical to symptomatic AD occurs over decades. 18 Changes in molecular
biomarkers can now be identified as an individual transitions from CN to preclinical AD to symptomatic AD.19
Currently, criteria for preclinical AD stages classify CN individuals by neuroimaging and/or cerebral spinal fluid
(CSF) measures. CN Stage 0 individuals have no biomarker abnormalities. CN Stage 1 individuals have
amyloidosis. CN Stage 2 individuals have both amyloidosis and neurodegeneration. CN Stage 3 individuals
have evidence of subclinical cognitive changes.20-23 Measures of everyday function are currently not included
in the evaluation of CN individuals with preclinical AD. Growing evidence suggests functional mobility changes
occur in symptomatic AD, but gaps exist as to whether functional mobility and falls are a preclinical marker of
AD.24 Our preliminary data suggest that falls occur at higher rates in the preclinical phase of the disease and
that the mechanisms that underlie deteriorating cognitive function are associated with declines in gait and
balance. In this proposal, we will identify the preclinical stage when falls begin to occur.
Novel, non-invasive neuroimaging methods can assess functional connections within the brain as an
individual quietly rests in a scanner.25 Resting state functional connectivity (rs-fc) decreases in symptomatic
AD, and our preliminary data demonstrate that it is also decreased in CN individuals with preclinical AD.
Specifically, we have identified that a reduction in rs-fc occurs in the dorsal attention network (DAN), a set of
regions involved in attentional control.26 Connections within the DAN and between other brain networks may
lead to an inability to process the complex demands to navigate an environment. The relationship between rs-
fc and functional mobility and falls, especially in CN individuals with preclinical AD, is unknown.
The team will study an existing cohort of CN older adults that has been well characterized using
multiple modalities (including neuropsychological performance testing, clinical evaluation, CSF, and
neuroimaging) in the Knight Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC). Our team will generate a unique
set of functional and fall-related variables in participants 65 years or older with and without preclinical markers
of AD. We have scientifically justified our study based on the following preliminary data.
CN older adults with preclinical AD have a higher risk of falls compared to CN older adults without
preclinical AD. To examine the relationship between
preclinical AD and falls, 125 CN older adults from the Knight
ADRC prospectively reported falls monthly using a calendar
journal to evaluate the occurrence of falls in the home and
community.27 Falls were confirmed by a standardized interview.
Participants were divided into those with the most extreme
values of amyloidosis using positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging (radiotracer [11C]–Pittsburgh Compound B
[PiB]). Overall, the sample was predominately female (74.4%)
and white (78.8%), with a mean age of 74.5 years old. The 125
participants reported 154 falls over the 365-day monitoring
period; 75 individuals (66%) had at least one fall over the 1-
year interval, with the total number of falls for a participant
ranging from 0–12. The cumulative incidence of first fall was
greater in the preclinical AD group after controlling for activities
of daily living (ADLs; hazard ratio [HR], 2.95; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.01-6.45; p = 0.05; Figure 1). This promising
preliminary data did not control for known fall risk factors and
Figure 1. Kaplan-Meier curves for time to first fall for CN
with preclinical AD and CN without preclinical AD
participants. PIB, Pittsburgh Compound B.
<<<PAGE 10>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
10
was not sufficiently powered to examine the rate of falls by preclinical stage. The proposed study will extend
these findings by increasing the sample size, controlling for fall covariates, and using molecular markers to
stage preclinical AD.
Longitudinal changes in preclinical AD biomarkers are
related to the number and severity of falls among CN older
adults. We performed a 3-year retrospective analysis of the
number and severity of falls from a cohort of 97 CN older
adults followed at the Knight ADRC (mean age, 74.2 ± 6.5
years old; 66% female). Falls were reported at annual
interviews. A multiple linear regression analysis explored the
rate and severity of falls as a function of CSF molecular
biomarkers (Aβ42, tau, and p-tau) while controlling for age and
gender. Table 1 shows that Aβ42 was a significant predictor of
both frequency of falls (F = 4.58, p = .01, R = .57, R2 = .33) and
fall severity (F = 4.15, p = .02, R = .55, R2 = .31) at year 3 (n =
34). These results suggest that longitudinal changes in falls are
sensitive in detecting preclinical AD changes. The current
proposal will extend these preliminary findings by increasing
the sample size, controlling for important fall covariates, and using molecular markers to longitudinally assess
as CN participants progress to symptomatic AD.
Molecular biomarkers can stage preclinical AD.22 We examined data from CN participants enrolled in
longitudinal aging studies at the Knight ADRC. Participants
were classified by CSF Aβ1-42 and tau concentrations and a
memory composite score as either normal, preclinical AD
Stage 1–3, or suspected non-AD pathophysiology (SNAP;
abnormal injury marker without abnormal amyloid marker).
Of the 311 participants, 129 (41%) were classified as
normal, 47 (15%) as Stage 1, 36 (12%) as Stage 2, 13 (4%)
as Stage 3, 72 (23%) as SNAP, and 14 (5%) remained
unclassified. The 5-year progression rate to a Clinical
Dementia Rating (CDR) of 0.5 or more (symptomatic AD)
was 2% for participants classified as normal, 11% for Stage
1, 26% for Stage 2, and 56% for Stage 3 (Figure 2.) There is
a gap in understanding where changes in functional mobility
and falls lie within preclinical AD stages and the progression
rate for CN individuals to symptomatic AD. Within a well-characterized, longitudinally assessed cohort, we will
extend these findings by including fall risk within preclinical stages of AD.
Mild changes in functional mobility, as captured by performance-based assessments, predate
conversion to symptomatic AD. A cohort of 435 CN adults 60 years or older underwent annual assessments
of physical and cognitive function at the Knight ADRC over a 5-year interval. A subset of these participants (n =
81) subsequently developed symptomatic AD over this period. Those who developed AD were older (81.0 vs.
74.2 years old, p = 0.001) and had worse performance on the Physical Performance Test (PPT; 25.5 vs. 28.1;
p = .009), which is a clinical performance-based measure of strength, mobility, dexterity, and stamina. In an
adjusted analysis (age, sex, education, and APOE ε4 allele), the nine-item PPT scores significantly predicted
time to diagnosis (HR, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.89-0.99; p = .02). These results suggest that mild functional mobility
impairments are associated with subsequent development of symptomatic AD. Within a well-characterized,
longitudinally assessed cohort, we will examine fall risk within each of these preclinical stages of AD.
Changes in rs-fc occur with symptomatic AD, mild cognitive impairment, and mild AD.  Multiple resting
state networks (RSNs) were assessed among CN (CDR 0, n = 386), MCI (CDR 0.5, n = 91), and mild AD
Table 1. Multiple linear regression of CSF biomarkers
predicting falls and severity of falls at 3 years
n = 34 Variable
Standard
Coefficie
nt
t CI
No. of
Falls
(Constant)
1.70 -0.45~4.87
Age -0.28  2.24 0.03~0.63
Gender  0.34 -1.69 -0.06~0.01
Aβ42 -0.40 -2.47 -1.43E-3~-
1.40E-4
Severit
y of
Falls
(Constant)
1.87 -0.38 ~ 8.72
Age -0.31 -1.90 -0.11 ~ 0.004
Gender  0.32  2.06 0.01 ~ 1.03
Aβ42 -0.37 -2.25 -0.002 ~ -1.1E-4
Figure 2. Progression to symptomatic AD (CDR >
0) from preclinical AD stage over 14-year follow-up.
<<<PAGE 11>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
11
(CDR 1, n = 33) including the DMN, DAN, control
(CON), SAL, and sensorimotor (SMN; Figure 3A).28 We
used 36 seed regions. With increasing disease
progression, both intra- and inter-network functional
correlations were disrupted. By symptomatic AD (CDR
1), the integrity of all intra-network RSNs was
significantly diminished compared to CDR 0. Intra-
network connections within the DMN, DAN, and CON
were diminished for MCI (CDR 0.5) compared to CN
(CDR 0) participants. Intra-network functional
correlations within the SAL were increased for MCI
(CDR 0.5) compared to CN (CDR 0) individuals (Figure
3B). Similar results were also seen for inter-network
relationships, with a loss in connections between
networks with increasing degree of cognitive
impairment. This proposal will study the effects of
network dysfunction on downstream measures of
functional mobility and falls.
Rs-fc is decreased for CN older adults with falls compared to CN older adults without falls.  Rs-fc was
performed on a sample of 24 CN older adults with falls (mean age, 75 years old) and 28 CN older adults
without falls (mean age, 71 years old). Two hundred ninety-eight regions, representing 13 RSNs, were derived
by maximizing the topographic concordance between results obtained by seed-based correlation mapping. To
assess the changes in all seeds for all RSNs, matrices were computed (Figure 4). Intra-network correlations
are displayed in blocks along the diagonal; cross-network correlations appear in off-diagonal blocks. The CN
older adults with falls (middle) and no falls (right) matrices show positive correlations within each RSN and
negative correlations between networks. The difference matrix (Falls–No Falls) was also computed (left). CN
older adults with falls had significant decreases in intra-network rs-fc within the DAN, DMN, and visual (VIS)
networks. Inter-network functional connections between the DAN and DMN were diminished in CN fallers
compared to CN non-fallers. This proposal will study whether changes within and between RSNs lead to falls
and gait instability prior to subjective memory complaints.
Error rates for the
Stroop task are a
marker for conversion
to symptomatic AD. We
completed a
retrospective analysis of
a sample of 47 CN older
adults to explore the
utility of the computerized
Stroop task, which
measures attention and
processing speed, to discriminate those who convert to AD from those who do not. Errors on color incongruent
trials and changes in the tail of the reaction time distribution were the strongest predictors of conversion to
symptomatic AD. Differences were not observed for standard episodic memory measures, logical memory, or
associated recall. We developed an attentional composite (including error rates from the Stroop, Simon, and
Attention Switching tasks) to examine the relation between attentional control and biomarkers in a sample of
238 CN individuals. This attentional composite was sensitive to differences in CSF A β42 at baseline and
longitudinally. Preclinical individuals with high CSF tau exhibited a steeper decline in the attentional control
composite than individuals low in CSF tau, suggesting sensitivity between our cognitive measures and
preclinical biomarkers.29
Figure 4. ROI pair correlation matrices for falls–no falls (left), falls (middle), no falls (right) CN individuals
Figure 3A: Rs-fc maps for five RSNs from CDR 0, CDR 0.5, and
CDR 1 groups. B: RSN composite scores as a function of disease
severity. Thick solid line, DMN; dashed line, DAN; dotted line,
CON; dashed and dotted line, SAL; thin solid line, SMN.
<<<PAGE 12>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
12
RSN composite scores are associated with Stroop performance. We have assessed the relationship
between reaction time distributional analysis, error rates from the Stroop task, and rs-fc in four distinct RSNs:
the DMN, SAL, DAN, and SMN, within a sample of 237 CN older adults. A larger Stroop effect in the error rate
in the incongruent condition was associated with reduced rs-fc in both the SAL and DMN. The slow tail of the
reaction time distribution for the Stroop task was also related to reduced rs-fc within the SAL. These results
suggest that a link exists between RSN composite scores and specific attentional performance measures. 30
This proposal will examine the relationship between attentional/executive mechanisms and their underlying
RSNs to the occurrence of falls.
DS supplement:
Nearly all adults with DS develop the neuropathological features of preclinical AD by the age of 40
years.3 Similar to the cognitively normal (CN) adult population, there is also an urgent need to understand the
preclinical and early phases of AD progression within the adult population aging with DS. While individuals with
DS have a higher rate of falls, it remains unknown when falls occur in the progression to AD within adults with
DS.6,7 Currently, the Alzheimer's Biomarkers Consortium—Down Syndrome (ABC-DS), of which WUSM is a
site, is contributing to the largest U.S.-based, multisite biomarker initiative to target preclinical AD in the DS
population. The measures collected by the consortium include clinical, cognitive, and AD measures. 3 There is
a need to expand this research to include functional measures such as falls, fall risk, and functional mobility. 3
Falls and functional mobility are associated with clinical measures of cognition and may be a non-cognitive
behavioral biomarker of AD.8,31,32 A better understanding of function could inform this biomarker profile through
a direct and less invasive method of assessment, therefore reducing burden for both the participant and
caregivers.3,33,34
Dr. Washington will be guided by mentors Drs. Stark and Ances, who are in collaboration regarding a
similar area in late-onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD). Dr. Ances is the site PI for the ABC-DS. Drs. Stark and
Acnes’ expertise in aging will support Dr. Washington’s understanding of key pathophysiological changes seen
in neurodegenerative diseases. Dr. Washington will follow a cohort of community-dwelling adults with DS
currently participating in the ABC-DS study at WUSM. This study will examine falls and functional mobility
among adults aging with DS and their relationship with preclinical AD. It will serve as the necessary
groundwork for a larger study related to falls and preclinical AD. This is the first study, to our knowledge, to
quantitatively assess patterns of falls and functional mobility impairments that occur within a community-
dwelling adult population aging with DS. The central hypotheses are: (1) similar to older adult populations, falls
and impaired functional mobility in aging adults with DS may represent a sign of preclinical AD, and (2)
implementation of evidence-based assessments and measures will expand our knowledge of falls among
adults with DS and their relationship with preclinical AD. These measures could potentially serve as a method
to screen people aging with DS for AD pathology and will lead to a better understanding of functional and
cognitive changes that occur in this population.2,35,36
Study Design
All study aims will involve cross-sectional and
longitudinal data from a cohort of CN
community-dwelling older adults (Figure 5).
We will leverage the Knight ADRC
infrastructure to recruit and enroll a sample of
350 older adults (≥65 years old) and follow
them longitudinally for 4 years. We will benefit
from the existing Knight ADRC infrastructure,
including a well-characterized cohort of CN
older adults with longitudinal clinical and
neuropsychological assessment and
biomarker studies of biofluids (blood, CSF) and
neuroimaging (amyloid PET, structural and
functional MRI; green boxes in Figure 5). All
Knight ADRC enrollees agree in principle to
Figure 5. Research Design overview. Data that will be collected annually
include in-home assessments and prospective fall reporting using
calendars and functional mobility measurements (blue boxes). Participants
will be followed for 4 years.  Green boxes are measures of interest that are
currently collected by the Knight ADRC (no cost).
<<<PAGE 13>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
13
participate in all biomarker procedures. We will collect additional data (blue boxes in Figure 5) including non-
cognitive behavioral characteristics and environmental factors. By leveraging the vast Knight ADRC resources,
we can accomplish more than would be possible from a single funding source. As noted in the preliminary data
section, there is high enthusiasm by participants to have home monitoring, and few participants have been lost
to follow-up. In the interest of space, new manipulations are described in detail in this application, but
standardized procedures that are well established at the Knight ADRC are referenced and briefly described.
Throughout the application, we have attempted to use robust and unbiased strategies to assess falls and
functional mobility during the progression to symptomatic AD.
DS supplement:
We will leverage the ABC-DS infrastructure to recruit and enroll a sample of 30 aging adults (≥25 years
old) with Down syndrome and follow them over a course of 3-9 months. We will utilize the existing ABC-DS
and Knight ADRC infrastructure during the implementation of this study to expand our research efforts toward
recruitment and enhance the scientific rigor of this study.
Study Participants
Participants will include CN older adults currently enrolled in longitudinal studies of memory and aging at the
Knight ADRC37,38. Inclusion criteria: (1) 65 years or older and (2) CDR39 0 at their most recent clinical
assessment, indicating cognitive normality, or if a CDR isn’t available, AD8 ≤ 3 and MoCA score of ≥ 23.
Exclusion criteria: History of Parkinson’s disease. The Unified Parkinson’s disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) will
be used to assess the course or progression of Parkinson’s disease.40
In order to acquire a more robust sample and specifically characterize differences in immune
dysfunction effects in the stool or intestinal mucosal microbiome/microbiota/metagenome in symptomatic vs.
non-symptomatic individuals, and olfaction, participants only able to complete the stool collection portion of the
study may be CDR ≤ 2 and ≥ 50 years of age.
DS supplement:
Participants will include aging adults with Down syndrome enrolled in the ABC-DS study at the WUSM;
and adults with DS recruited from the greater St. Louis, MO area.  Inclusion criteria: community dwelling adults
with DS (full trisomy, partial trisomy, or mosaic Down syndrome), age ≥ 25 years, cognitively stable or mild
cognitive impairment as indicated by a score of <20 on the Dementia Screening Questionnaire for Individuals
with Intellectual Disabilities (DSQIID), and willingness to participate in study procedures and assessments;
Exclusion criteria: a condition(s) that would interfere with cognitive assessments including: unstable medical or
a psychiatric condition, severe motor or sensory impairment, and/or IQ less than 30-according to the KBIT or
from other medical/clinical documentation to verify an IQ of 30.
Recruitment
At the time of their annual clinical assessment, we will invite individuals to participate in this study if they meet
the inclusion criteria. Based on the Knight ADRC historic rate of conversion to symptomatic AD, over the next 4
years, we conservatively estimate that 28.6% of the sample will progress from CN (CDR 0) to MCI or AD (CDR
>0). In our pilot prospective fall study, 83% of the eligible pool of participants at the Knight ADRC agreed within
1 month of their clinical assessment to enroll in the study, and 98% agreed to be contacted for future fall
studies.
DS supplement:
We will provide paper and electronic distribution of our flyer to patients within the clinical office of Dr.
Ances at WUSM, along with presenting our study and distributing flyers to the following organizations: Down
Syndrome Association of Greater St. Louis, United Cerebral Palsy- Heartland, St. Louis ARC, Albert Pujols
Wellness Center for Adults with Down Syndrome, St. Louis Office for Developmental Disability Resources,
Down Syndrome Innovations, and other community agencies throughout Missouri and the Metro East Region.
We will also utilize Volunteer for Health and will post the recruitment flyer on social media. We will also utilize
EPIC to identify potential candidates based on our eligibility criteria.
<<<PAGE 14>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
14
Randomization and Blinding – N/A
Consent
A study team member will approach all potential participants who meet the inclusion criteria and invite them to
participate in the study. The informed consent form will be administered to all patients interested in
participating in the study.
During the consent process, participants will: (1) have what the study is about and what is expected of
them explained in detail either over the phone, over Zoom/HIPAA secure platform, or in person when remote is
not possible; (2) discuss  potential problems that could interfere with participation either over the phone,
Zoom/HIPAA secure platform, or in person when remote is not possible; (3) have their questions answered
either over the phone, Zoom/HIPAA secure platform, or in person when remote is not possible; and (4) receive
a summary of the study and contact information for the PI and study coordinator. Informed consent to
participate in the study will be obtained before any test or measurements are performed. The consent form will
be signed by a witness and will be stored in REDCap, or paper copies will be stored the office of the PI under
double locks. Participants will be advised in the consent form that there is a possibility that their medical
research record, including identifying information, may be inspected and photocopied by officials of federal or
state government agencies and the Washington University Human Research Protection Office (HRPO).
For potential participants who have computer access and capability, the formal study consent process
will be conducted using a REDCap-based electronic consent form. The consent form has been developed in
REDCap, a secure, Web-based, HIPAA-compliant data collection platform with a user management system
allowing the PI to grant and control varying levels of access to study staff. Potential participants would receive
an email with a unique link to review the informed consent form online. After the research team explains the
study and answers any questions, the potential participants can electronically fill in an “Agree” button, followed
by their electronic signature. There is also a timestamp in REDCap that is utilized for the e-consent process. It
is turned on and active, and each consent will have a date and timestamp for the signature. Upon completion
of the consent, participants are presented with the option to download a copy of the executed form. The
research team will also email a copy of the executed form to the participant. E-consent versioning will be
managed using the e-consent framework in REDCap. Within the e-consent survey options, we have
designated the e-consent version number in this application as e-consent version 1. The PDFs of completed
responses will have the timestamp, participant name, and e-consent version number inserted in the footer.
Future versions of the e-consent will be created by making a copy of the REDCap form and revising it. The old
version would be deactivated upon receiving institutional review board (IRB) approval for the new version.
If a participant does not have access to a computer or smart device at the time of consent, potential
participants will be provided with a copy of the informed consent in person or via mail. Once the potential
participant has had time to look over the consent form, a study team member will talk with the participant by
phone to review the study information and answer any questions. If they choose to continue their participation,
they will be asked to sign the consent and return it to us either by email (scan or photo) or regular mail (postal
service). The signed consent form will then be downloaded (if applicable) and retained by research staff. We
will instruct participants to keep a copy for themselves.
We will continue to use the electronic consent process even after COVID restrictions have been lifted.
All procedures will be the same as described above but with an option for signing in person using the electronic
consent on a study-provided iPad. This will happen as follows: Once the potential participant has had time to
look over the consent form provided to them either via email or paper copy, a study team member will talk with
the participant in person to review the study information and answer any questions. If they decide to
participate, they will be asked to sign the electronic version of the consent using a study-provided iPad. We will
email a copy of the consent form if the participant has a valid email address; otherwise, we will download a
copy and provide it to the participant. In the event that participants who consented using the REDCap e-
consent would need to be re-consented, we will send the participant a link to the new version to discuss, sign
electronically, download, and receive via email as described above.
The following privacy protections will be enacted for all patient communication via email: (1) a test email
will be sent to the participant to verify their identify (confirm correct recipient) and that this email will be sent in
a secure manner (i.e., [secure] in subject line); (2) the body of the email will instruct the participant to send all
<<<PAGE 15>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
15
information as a response to this thread and to not remove the "[secure]" from the subject line; (3) we will
document in our research records that the participant agreed to provide information over email.
Starting in Year 2, participants who enrolled prior to the approval of the November 21, 2019 IRB
modification will be re-consented to participate in all updated assessments and procedures; however, monthly
phone calls will continue as part of the original consent.
DS supplement:
During the consent process we will use a stepwise approach (screening followed by consent) through
the MacArthur Competency Assessment Tool for Clinical Research41 which is the gold standard of assessing
capacity to participate in research within populations with potential decreased decision-making abilities. In this
process we will include: Screening-1) Presentation of initial consent-simplification and 2) understanding and
assent; Enrollment- 3) continual knowledge dissemination of the study process and procedures, 4) periodic
discussions of decisional capacity throughout the study with the participant and/or caregiver to ascertain if
there is continual understanding and assent (Appendix A).
Primary Intervention – N/A
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
An update about the study and study-related visits during the pandemic will be sent to all participants who have
enrolled as of March 17, 2020. Participants will continue to receive automated calls or emails, but in-home
visits are postponed. Participants who are due for their annual in-home visit may complete the
questionnaires/assessments via phone, email, and/or Zoom/HIPAA secure telehealth platform during this time.
They will also be re-consented to participate in updated procedures and assessment as needed. If they agree
to participate in the stool portion, they will be mailed a stool kit.
Data Collection
Currently collected assessments at the Knight ADRC
Many measures of interest are captured as part of annual clinical examinations,42 neuropsychological
evaluations,43 and biomarker acquisition44 conducted at the Knight ADRC.
Knight ADRC clinical assessments: Demographic variables (age, sex, race, APOE ε4, and CDR),39 and
depression will be collected and included as covariates.37 The annual clinical assessment battery is conducted
by experienced clinicians using a standardized protocol. The evaluation includes a health history, medication
and depression inventories, and a general physical and neurologic examination of the participant.37,45,46 As we
are enrolling participants at the time of their clinical assessment, we will use the assessment closest to
enrollment as the baseline assessment. Demographics including age, sex, race, and educational attainment
are collected or confirmed per a standardized protocol. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) is obtained during
the annual clinical examination. Clinicians interview the participant and a collateral source using a standardized
protocol. The CDR is based on performance in six domains: memory, orientation, judgment and problem
solving, community affairs, home and hobbies, and personal care. The instrument has established reliability.47
CDR scores are assigned using a standardized algorithm and range from 0 (cognitive normality) to 3 (severe
dementia). In individuals with CDR >0, the diagnosis of AD dementia and other dementing conditions is made
in accordance with standard criteria based on the principle of intra-individual change.48 The Geriatric
Depression Scale Short Form (GDS-SF)49 will be used to assess depression, a known fall risk factor.50
Specifically designed and validated for older adults,51 the 15-item GDS-SF correlates highly with the original
30-item test (r = .84). Per GDS-SF scoring guidelines, we will classify a score of 5 or more as indicative of
probable depression. ε4 (APOEε4) genotype is the strongest risk factor for AD but is also associated with poor
mobility and physical function.37,52 We will include APOE ε4 genotype as a covariate. APOEε4 genotyping is
performed using polymerase chain reaction on DNA isolated from whole-blood samples as described
previously.37 Participants who have one or more APOEε4 allele(s) will be identified as carriers.
<<<PAGE 16>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
16
Knight ADRC psychometric assessment: Participants will complete a 2-hour psychometric battery within ~2
weeks of their annual clinical assessment. Trained psychometrists blind to the participant’s preclinical AD
status will administer the tests via a standardized protocol.43 The battery is composed of standard paper-and-
pencil measures and novel computerized measures. Our battery has sound psychometric characteristics that
have previously been shown to accurately differentiate healthy aging from preclinical AD.53 We have identified
patterns of cognitive performance that are highly predictive of the transition from healthy aging to AD,
including autopsy-verified AD.54 Our center was among the first to demonstrate that declines in cognitive
functioning are associated with abnormal levels of in vivo AD biomarkers, including amyloid imaging55 and CSF
biomarkers including amyloid, tau, and p-tau.56 Our novel computerized measures of attentional control have
shown sensitivity to preclinical and early-stage symptomatic AD using reaction time distributional analyses,56,57
analyses of errors and switch costs,58-60 variability in controlled timing performance,61 and semantic retrieval.62
We have completed extensive factor and latent growth curve analyses of the existing Knight ADRC database
and have developed cognitive composites. These cognitive composites include two memory composites
(including episodic), two attentional control composites, a visuospatial composite, and a global cognitive
composite.
Brain neuropathology assessments: To detect the in vivo presence of amyloid in the brain, PET using the
radiotracer [18F] Florbetapir are obtained from participants within the Knight ADRC.63 Soluble levels of amyloid
(Aβ42) are obtained from CSF studies. To detect the presence of neurofibrillary tangles, t-tau and p-tau are
assayed from CSF.64,65 To detect neurodegeneration, brain volumetrics will be analyzed for cortical and
subcortical signature areas affected by AD.66 PET imaging analysis: Florbetapir images are obtained using a
standard protocol on a 3T Siemens Biograph mMR hybrid scanner that allows for simultaneous MRI and PET
acquisition. This reduces the burden on subjects and improves registration between imaging modalities.
Quantitative image analysis is performed using a standard amyloid imaging analysis protocol44 that uses
FreeSurfer regions of interest (ROIs). Regional standard uptake value ratios (SUVRs) are obtained using the
cerebellum as the reference region. CSF biomarkers: CSF analyses (APOE42, t-tau, and p-tau181; Innotest,
Innogenetics: Ghent, Belgium) are collected according to a standard procedure67 using sensitive and
quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbant assays (ELISAs). CSF is obtained using a 22-gauge Sprotte spinal
needle to draw 20–30 mL of CSF at 8:00 AM following an overnight fast. CSF samples are gently inverted and
centrifuged at a low speed to avoid possible gradient effects and are frozen at −84°C after being aliquoted into
polypropylene tubes. All biomarker assays include a common reference standard, within-plate sample
randomization, and strict standardized protocol adherence. Samples are re-analyzed if coefficients of variability
(CVs) exceed 25% (per ADNI criteria), there are “edge artifacts” in the ELISA, there are suboptimal bead
counts in xMAP, or reference standard yields widely discrepant values. Brain volumetrics: High-resolution
structural MRI scans are acquired using a T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo
(MPRAGE) sequence. Images are subsequently analyzed using standard procedures developed at the Knight
ADRC including FreeSurfer to delineate brain regions typically affected by AD.66 Preclinical AD staging20: The
following cutoffs have been operationalized for biomarkers collected at the Knight ADRC22: CSF <459 pg/mL
for Aβ1–42, >339 pg/mL for t-tau, and >67 pg/mL for p-tau181; hippocampal and cortical signature volumes 1.5
standard deviations (SD) below the norm; and episodic memory composite score in the lowest 10th percentile.
Participants will be classified as: CN if episodic memory and all CSF markers and brain MRI markers are
normal; Stage 1 if CSF Aβ1–42 is abnormal or Florbetapir mean cortical binding potential is greater than 1.22;
Stage 2 if amyloid PET or CSF Aβ1–42 and either CSF t-tau/p-tau181, or brain volumetrics are abnormal; and
Stage 3 if amyloid PET or Aβ1–42 and either CSF t-tau/p-tau181, brain volumetrics, and episodic memory are
abnormal. Participants will be classified as SNAP with no amyloid, elevated t-tau or p-tau, with or without
subtle cognitive decline. SNAP individuals will be excluded.
Network dysfunction assessments: During the MRI scan, two rs-fc runs are obtained using a gradient spin-
echo sequence. Participants are instructed to fixate on a visual cross-hair and not to fall asleep. Rs-fc pre- and
post-processing is performed using standardized methods developed by our group.68 In preparation for
correlation analysis, data are spatially smoothed with a 6mm full-width at half maximum Gaussian blur. Then,
temporal low-pass filtering (f < 0.1 Hz) is applied to the time series of each voxel. Finally, spurious variance is
removed using linear regression for: (1) six parameters generated from head motion correction, (2) the whole
<<<PAGE 17>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
17
brain signal, and (3) signal from ventricular and cerebral white matter. An ROI-based analysis consisting of 298
seeds is performed with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient computed between pairwise ROI time courses
across all areas within RSNs. From these 298 seeds, correlation matrices are generated for each participant.
For the 13 RSNs, correlation coefficients across ROI pairs within a network are averaged to form a composite
score. Based on average matrices, both intra- (diagonal) and inter- (off diagonal) network composite scores
are generated.
Central nervous system assessments (Table 2): We have identified patterns of cognitive performance in
attention and executive control measures that are highly predictive of the transition from healthy aging to
symptomatic AD,54,69 including autopsy-verified AD.54 We will use sensitive composite scores of attentional and
executive control tests (Table 2) to examine if it uniquely predicts functional mobility and falls.43 In order to
provide a strong test of this hypothesis, we will also generate a memory composite based on the Logical
Memory Test70, Selective Remind Tests,71 and the associate memory test, which has previously been shown to
be sensitive to preclinical change.43 In this way, we will be able to examine the degree to which the model fit is
influenced by the attentional control composite above and beyond the memory deficits of AD.
New assessments
Peripheral nervous system abnormalities (Table 2): Peripheral abnormalities will be assessed by a board-
certified neurologist during the annual physical and neurological exam at the Knight ADRC. The standard
neurological examination evaluates cranial nerves (including vision), motor strength (including lower extremity
strength), coordination, and balance.91 In addition, quantification of muscle strength will be obtained through
handheld dynamometers.80 This instrument records the force produced by loading through tension or
compression. The minimal change in the peak torque value can be measured in units of weight such as
pounds or kilograms.80,92 To assess postural instability, a balance board will be used to quantify the center of
pressure (CoP).76,93 The CoP path and velocity will be measured in the following trials: single limb, eyes open;
single limb, eyes open, dual task; single limb, eyes closed; double limb, eyes open; double limb, eyes open,
dual task, double limb, eyes closed.
Table 2. Central and peripheral nervous system measures by construct
Construct Measure Description
Central nervous
system
Attentional/
executive
control
composite
derived
Stroop color naming
task72*
Color naming of congruent (e.g., red), neutral (e.g., deep), or
incongruent word (e.g., blue).
Simon task73* Naming direction of an arrow with a keypress that is spatially consistent
or inconsistent with the location of the arrow including congruent and
incongruent positioning
Attentional switching
task74*
Switching every other trial between making odd-even decisions and
consonant-vowel decisions on bivalent stimuli (e.g., B14)
Peripheral nervous system
Standing,
balance, and
vestibular
function
Center of pressure
path75,76
Center of pressure path will be measured  using Balance Tracking
System (BTrackS) in the following trials: single limb, eyes open; single
limb, eyes closed; double limb, eyes open; double limb, eyes closed
Lower
extremity
strength and
function
30-Second chair stand
test77-79
A score below the norm will be considered indicative of decreased
lower extremity strength and function
Handheld dynamometer80   Minimal change in the peak torque value for lower extremity strength
will be measured
Vision  ETDRS81 Visual acuity score; number of correct letters read
Pelli-Robson82 Contrast sensitivity; letter-by-letter
Sensation Vibration83-85 and Sharp A tuning fork will be used test the big toes
Sharp (arms and legs)
* Collected by the Knight ADRC at clinical exams
Note. Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) test
<<<PAGE 18>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
18
In-home functional mobility assessments
(Table 3): It is likely that motor and cognitive
changes share a common underlying
pathophysiology.17,94-96 In particular, gait
variability, speed, and dual-task have
demonstrated evidence as potential predictors of
the development of MCI and AD94,95,97and falls.98-
100 Opal sensors will also be worn by participants
during gait and balance testing (Performance
Oriented Mobility Assessment [POMA] and Timed
Up and Go (TUG) tests [TUG, TUGcog, and
TUGman]). A certified occupational therapy (OT)
rater blinded to the status of the CN participants
will conduct all assessments.
Fall ascertainment: This study will provide unique information to this population by collecting prospective
monthly fall reports. Retrospective fall reporting has demonstrated an underreporting of falls101,102; prospective
daily recordings with interview confirmation are recommended.102-104 All participants will use the gold-standard
for fall reporting (daily calendar journal, monthly reporting, and fall interviews).104 This technique was
developed and tested in the Knight ADRC population.
Calendar journal: All participants will record daily falls using a tailored calendar journal.105 The technique
includes using daily habits to remember to record, monthly incentives, and landmark events on the calendar to
improve recall. Monthly, participants will return journal pages via U.S. mail or report falls via automated
call/email. Throughout the journal, spaces are available to record daily whether a fall or no fall occurred. A “fall
hotline” is also available for participants who wish to report their fall immediately. Participants receive phone
calls to prompt return of missing pages and/or to respond to the monthly call/email.104 A fall report form is
provided in the calendar so participants can note the time, location, nature of the fall environment, specific
activity at the time of the fall, and any somatic complaints that proceeded the fall.106
Fall interview: A fall report from the calendar will be followed up via telephone interview with a trained
interviewer blinded to preclinical AD status.116 Falls, defined as unintentional movements to the floor, ground,
or an object below knee level, will be verified.104 Fall details will be ascertained, including injuries or medical
treatment, using a standardized fall report form.27,105,117 Severity of injuries will be ascertained from medical
records and participant report.118 We will determine the rate (number) and severity of falls (calculated with a
standardized algorithm).10 The fall severity score will be quantified using a previously published algorithm: no
falls (0); one fall without serious injury (1); any fall with minor injury or more than one fall (2); and major injury
requiring hospitalization (3).9
Table 3. Functional mobility assessments
Construct Measure Description
Dynamic
balance and
mobility
POMA86   A task-oriented assessment of 9 balance
tasks and 7 items to assess gait
Gait speed TUG
test78,87
Timed task of standing up, walking 3m,
turning, walking back, and sitting down
Dual-task
gait
TUGcog88,
89
TUG test while reciting serial 3s with
subtractions from various points,
90/80/70
TUGman90 TUG test while carrying a glass of water
Note. Performance Oriented Mobility Assessment (POMA); The Timed Up
and Go (TUG) test
<<<PAGE 19>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
19
Fall covariates
assessments:
Recognized fall
covariates119,120 will be
assessed at the Knight
ADRC and may be
completed over the
phone, via email, and/or
in home at baseline and
annual follow-up (Table
4). Fall risk assessments
were chosen using the
criteria for practical
physiological
assessments120 (Table
3). Falls have
multifactorial risks,120-122
and the majority of falls
in older adults occur at
home.123 In-home, real-
world assessments
contribute to the fall risk
profile by adding factors
that cannot be assessed
in a clinical setting.
Factors such as
dependence in ADLs124
have been associated
with an increased fall risk. Intrinsic factors that can affect falls include incontinence,109 pain, depression,
vision,125-127 fear of falling,128,129 and alcohol abuse.130 Extrinsic factors such as polypharmacy131,132 and home
hazards133 are also associated with falls. Opal sensors will also be worn by participants during the Westmead
Home Safety Assessment. A fall risk composite score will be calculated using established cut-off values.
Scores will be dichotomized as 0 for no fall risk and 1 for fall risk (see Table 3 for cut off scores) and summed
to create a composite fall risk score.107 The composite will be used to assess annual overall fall risk and as a
covariate in analyses.
Additional assessments of interest are listed in Table 5.
Table 4. Fall covariate composite score variables
Construct Measure Description Fall risk cut-off 107
Vision  ETDRS test81 Visual acuity score; number of
correct letters read
≤6/12
Pelli-Robson test82 Contrast sensitivity; letter-by-
letter
<36 letters
Alcohol abuse SMAST-G108 10-item interview  ≥2
Urinary
incontinence
Frequency and
type109
Short questionnaire of type
(stress, urge, or other) and
frequency
≥weekly urge
incontinence
Depression* GDS-SF49  15-item questionnaire; 0-15
points
>4
Pain Self-report110 Pain scale from SF-12 ≥moderate
Medication* Medication review Medications and dosages  ≥4 medications
Functional
capacity
OARS ADL
scale111-113
Ability to perform 14 activities;
0-2 scale, higher scores indicate
greater independence
>4
Previous falls Previous falls107 Total falls in past 12 months >0
Home hazards Westmead Home
Safety
Assessment114
Rates 72 environmental home
hazards as hazard/no hazard
≥4 hazards
Self-efficacy
FES-ISF115
7 daily activities; rated from 1
(not at all) to 4 (very concerned)
about falling during the activity
>10
*Collected by the Knight ADRC at clinical exams
Note. Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) test; Short Michigan Alcoholism Screening
Test Geriatric Version (SMAST-G); Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-SF);  Older Adult Resources Services
Activity of Daily Living (OARS ADL); Falls Efficacy Scale-International Short Form (FES-ISF)
Table 5. Additional assessments
Construct Measure Description
Depression PHQ 9134     10-item questionnaire to assess frequency of symptoms; 0–27 points
Grip
strength
Handheld
dynamometer135
Pounds of force will be captured for grip strength
Functional
performance
PASS136 Evaluates independence, safety, and adequacy with shopping,
checkbook balancing, and medication management.
Falls
behavior
FaB137 30-item questionnaire; rated from 1 (least protective) to 4 (most
protective) behaviors to prevent falls
Immune
dysfunction
Stool sample Stool sample and associated dietary and gastrointestinal
questionnaires
Olfaction UPSIT138 40-item smell identification test; 0-40 points
Hearing HHIE-S139 10-item questionnaire to screen for hearing impairment; 0-40 points.
Brief Hearing Test Screening tone test at varying frequencies
Note. Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ 9); Performance Assessment of Self-Care Skills (PASS); Falls Behavioral
Scale for Older People (FaB);  University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT);  Hearing Handicap
Inventory for the Elderly Screening Version (HHIE-S)
<<<PAGE 20>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
20
Stool: Participants will be invited to provide optional stool samples around the time of the annual in-home
assessment. If they choose to participate, participants will complete questionnaires regarding gastrointestinal
function and dietary intake. They will also report any updates to their medications and health status (i.e., any
recent illnesses, hospitalizations, etc.) each month (CDR ≤ 2 only in the stool collection portion of the study
report prn). A subset of participants will be asked if they are willing to provide additional samples to examine
the stability of the gut microbiome over time.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) assessments: In response to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, we will ask
participants about their access to technology, willingness to participate in telehealth visits as needed, and
COVID-19 diagnoses and symptoms. Participants will also have the opportunity to complete additional
questions each month by phone or email. (Table 6).
DS supplement:
Research Goal 1: To assess fall risk and functional mobility among adults aging with DS. Clinical
assessments of fall risk covariants and functional mobility/performance: We will utilize existing participant data
from the ABC-DS study at baseline or collected within the in- home assessment related to fall risk factors,150
which include: hearing,7,151 orthostasis,152vision,153,154  upper extremity (UE) strength,6  incontinence, 155 pain,156
depression, 157 sensation,158 motor coordination and balance,159 and polypharmacy159,160 (see Table 7). We will
also use the Dementia screening questionnaire for individuals with intellectual disabilities161 to qualitatively
collect information regarding cognition and daily function of individuals with DS.
Table 6. Coronavirus (COVID-19) assessments
Construct Measure Description
COVID-19 Experiences
& symptoms
Have you been diagnosed with covid-19? y/n
Have you been social distancing because of covid-19? y/n
Alcohol/drug use Have you increased your alcohol (including beer, wine, or liquor) or drug use since January 2020
(before the coronavirus pandemic began)? y/n
Financial impact HCP Financial Impact 11-items; measures financial stress related to the pandemic
Instrumental support  NIH Toolbox Instrumental Support
Scale140,141
8-item questionnaire; rated from 1 (never) to 5 (always), higher
scores indicate more support
Physical & mental health PROMIS Global Health142 10-item questionnaire to assess general perceptions of health
Perceived stress NIH TB Perceived Stress CAT 18+ 10-items, rated on a 5-point Likert scale
Resilience CD-RISC 10143 10-items; 0–40 points, higher scores indicate greater resilience
Loneliness UCLA Loneliness Scale144 20-item questionnaire; higher scores indicate more loneliness
Social isolation PROMIS Social Isolation145 4-items; ranked from 1 (never) to 5 (always), lower scores
indicate less social isolation
Depression PHQ 9146  10 items to assess frequency of symptoms; 0–27 points
Anxiety PROMIS Anxiety (4 item)147
HADS148
4 items ranked on a 5-point Likert scale, higher scores indicate
more anxiety
Sleep PSQI149 9-item questionnaire; scale of 0-3, higher scores indicate “poor”
sleeper
Note. Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Global Health; 10-Item Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale (CD-
RISC 10); Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Social Isolation; Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System (PROMIS) Anxiety Short Form; Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS); Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI)
<<<PAGE 21>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
21
Research Goal 2: To investigate the prevalence of falls in aging adults with DS, and when falls occur
within the amyloid, tau, and neurodegeneration (ATN) model of AD. Evaluation of fall ascertainment:
participants with assistance from caregivers, or caregivers only, will fill out a monthly fall calendar and to report
any falls monthly for 3-9 months.
Research Goal 3: To determine a power estimation for a future standardized multisite study.
Data management, power calculation, and statistical analyses: The data obtained from participants for this
study will include: (1) demographic information and medical history, (2) Functional performance data and the
proposed study measures, and (3) fall calendar documentation. The data will be entered into Research
Electronic Data Capture (REDCap)166 and verified, and statistical programming will be completed in SAS.167
Statistical Analyses and Sample Size Calculations
Data will be entered into REDCap166 and verified. Programming will be done in SAS.168 Differences in baseline
characteristics across groups will be compared using appropriate statistics (chi-square test, Student’s t-test, or
Table 7. DS supplement assessments
Construct Measure Description Risk cut-off
Hearing**/*** Hearing Handicap Inventory for
the Elderly-screener (HHIE-S)151
10-item questionnaire to screen for
hearing impairment
≤8 no auditory concerns
Caregiver general questions 2 questions assessing hearing difficulty Profound hearing deficit
Orthostatic
hypotension**/***
Blood pressure with change in
position
1 and 3 min after standing Systolic decline ≥20mmHg
Vision*/** Visual Acuity153 Examination in ABC-DS clinic
OR Documentation of last eye exam
ABC-DS study criteria or
in home documentation
Sensation*/** Peripheral Neuropathy
Assessment158
Loss of Sensation questions only Chronic loss of sensation
UE Strength*/*** ABC-DS clinical exam/
Dynamometer162
Muscle strength  ABC-DS study
information/in home
Functional
mobility*/***
Tinetti Performance Oriented
Mobility Assessment86
A task-oriented assessment of 9 balance
tasks and 7 items to assess gait
≤19 total score
Cognition**  Dementia screening questionnaire
for individuals with intellectual
disabilities161
53 items and 3 parts; observer-rated
questionnaire
≥20 total score, further
testing advised
Medication*/** Medication review Medications and dosages ≥4 prescriptions
Depression** Participant or caregiver report157 Depression & medication, 1 (yes), 0 (no) depression 1, medication 0
Urinary
incontinence**
Participant or caregiver report 21,109 Short questionnaire of type, frequency,
and incidents
≥weekly incontinence
Muscle Strength
(LE)***
30 second Chair Stand Test77-79 A score below the norm is indicative of
decreased lower extremity strength and
function
varies by age and gender
Gait Speed*** Timed up and Go78,87 Timed Task of standing up, walking 3m,
turning, walking back and sitting down
TUG ≥ 12 sec
Pain** Pain Likert Scale**
PEG-3: Pain Screening Tool163
Visual Pain Likert Scale ≥7 pain
Functional
capacity***
Waisman Activities of Daily
Living Scale (W-ADL)164
Ability to perform 17 activities  >4 dependent ADL
Previous Falls
/Fear of Falling
(FOF)/Self
Efficacy**
PROFANE Guidelines –
Self/Caregiver Report165
<<<SECTION 5 questions about falling>>>
5 questions about falling
varies by fall severity and
history of falls
Tinetti Fall Efficacy Scale-
international115
7 daily activities; rated from 1 (not at all)
to 4 (very concerned) about falling
during the activity
≥10
Home hazards*** Westmead Home Safety
Assessment114
Rater checklist of 72 fall home hazards  >4 hazards
* Note. *ABC-DS data, **Participant or Caregiver-report, ***Performance based assessment
<<<PAGE 22>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
22
Mann–Whitney U test). The fall severity score will be quantified using a previously published algorithm: no falls
(0); one fall without serious injury (1); any fall with minor injury or more than one fall (2); and major injury
requiring hospitalization (3).9  Preclinical AD staging20: The following cutoffs have been operationalized for
biomarkers collected at the Knight ADRC22: CSF <459 pg/mL for Aβ1–42, >339 pg/mL for t-tau, and >67 pg/mL
for p-tau181, and episodic memory composite score in the lowest 10th percentile. Participants will be classified
as CN if both episodic memory and all CSF markers are normal, Stage 1 if only Aβ1–42 is abnormal, Stage 2 if
Aβ1–42 and either t-tau or p-tau181 are abnormal, and Stage 3 if Aβ1–42 and either t-tau or p-tau181 and episodic
memory are abnormal. Participants will be classified as SNAP with no amyloid or elevated t-tau or p-tau, with
or without subtle cognitive decline. Individuals with SNAP will not be included for further analysis.
Aim 1a correlates falls and functional mobility with AD biomarkers to determine whether falls and functional
mobility are associated with preclinical stages of AD.
Statistical Analysis Plan for Aim 1a. Analyses to address Aim 1a will be cross sectional, using falls over
1 year and baseline functional mobility (POMA, Timed up and Go [TUG]) across the preclinical stages of AD.20
We will first examine the distributions of falls, POMA, and TUG dual-task across four preclinical stages: 0, 1, 2,
and 3. If the distributions are not normal, we will seek appropriate transformations (e.g., Box-Cox
transformations169). Subsequent analyses will be conducted on transformed values. Falls (number and
severity) and functional mobility across preclinical stages will be compared through group means or adjusted
means from the original or the transformed scale using analysis of covariance (ANOCOVA) models.170 In
addition to preclinical stages of AD, ANOCOVA models for falls will adjust for other covariates including age,
depression, sex, fall risk composite score, and APOE ε4 genotype, as well as possible interactions between
these factors and preclinical stages. These analyses will be implemented by PROC GLM/SAS.168 Similar
analyses will be conducted to determine whether functional mobility measures are also associated with
preclinical stages of AD. A major analytic concern in these tests is the control of overall type I error rate due to
multiple outcome variables (number and severity of falls, functional mobility) tested in this aim. We will address
this concern via two different approaches. First, we will implement a Monte Carlo algorithm and partition testing
procedure, such as Hochberg's method (1988)171 and Holm's method.172 Second, we will seek composite
markers (i.e., those based on factor analysis and principal component analyses) from all of these functional
variables and will conduct primary analyses using these composite markers.
Power Analysis for Aim 1a . We will enroll 350 older (≥65 years old) participants from the Knight ADRC.
Based on existing data concerning the Knight ADRC cohort (see preliminary data),22 we estimate that 41.5%
will be at preclinical Stage 0, 15% at Stage 1, 12% at Stage 2, and 4% at Stage 3. We powered Aim 1a by
testing the difference of fall (number and severity) and functional mobility variables across the four preclinical
AD stages. Assuming the effect size (i.e., mean difference) for a functional composite outcome between any
two adjacent participant groups (from Stage 0 to 3) is the same, the proposed sample sizes will provide at least
80% statistical power to detect an effect size as small as 0.225 SD (same SD assumed across the four
preclinical stages) on the composite outcome between two adjacent participant groups. Our power calculation
is based on an F-test (with three degrees of freedom for the numerator) on the main effect for each of the
preclinical stages with a one-way ANOVA model at a significance level of 5%.
Aim 1b determines whether change in preclinical disability falls (number and severity) and functional mobility
(POMA, TUG) over time predicts conversion to AD (operationalized by clinical and cognitive measures). We
hypothesize that an increase in falls and functional mobility impairments will be associated with a change in
global cognitive function and will predict conversion to symptomatic AD.
Statistical Analysis Plan for Aim 1b. The primary analysis for Aim 1b is to associate longitudinally
measured falls with the risk of subsequently developing symptomatic AD. To achieve this, we will jointly model
the longitudinal falls (number and severity) and the time to the symptom onset of AD (defined as the first time a
participant receives a CDR >0 due to AD). For modeling the longitudinal rates of changes in number and
severity of falls, we will use general linear mixed effects models.173 If a linear trend fits the data over time, we
will use standard random intercept and slope models.174 Otherwise we will seek nonlinear models such as the
piecewise linear model.175 For modeling the risk of developing AD, we will use the semi-parametric Cox
proportional hazards model. To address the association between change in falls and the risk of developing
symptomatic AD, we will incorporate the latent random intercept and slope from the general linear mixed model
<<<PAGE 23>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
23
into the Cox proportional hazards model in the joint analyses, which will allow us to test the hypothesis that the
rate of change in falls predicts the development of AD. More specifically, we will implement similar joint models
as in Jacqmin-Gadda et al.176 and De Gruttola & Tu.177 Because death is a potential competing risk in the
progression of dementia, two “survival times” will be observed for each participant: the time from baseline to
death, and the time from baseline to the clinical assessment when the participant has a CDR >0 and with an
etiologic diagnosis of AD. We will use the marginal models approach, which includes three common variants178
to model the risk of disease progression as a function of baseline biomarker values. These marginal models
amount to fitting individual ordinary semi-parametric Cox’s proportional hazards models179 for each “survival
time” and then using the robust sandwich variance/covariance estimator to account for the correlational
structure between two different “survival times” from the same participants. These approaches have been used
in similar biomedical applications.179 We will also examine the effect of potential confounding covariates such
as baseline age, depression, sex, fall covariate composite, and APOE ε4 status and conduct further analyses
after adjusting for the effects of these covariates. We will compute and report the asymptotic 95% CIs for the
HR associated with the disability scores. Model goodness-of-fit will be assessed through various model
diagnostic tools such as the residual plots and formal statistical tests by introducing time-dependent
covariates.180 Similar longitudinal analyses will also be conducted to determine whether longitudinal changes in
functional mobility (POMA, TUG) measures are also predictive of the conversion to symptomatic AD.
Power Analysis for Aim 1b. We calculated the power to test the primary scientific hypothesis that faster
increases in falls over time are associated with an increased risk of progression from CN to symptomatic AD.
We used the current Knight ADRC database to fit a survival curve from baseline to the time that a CDR >0 was
first rendered and found that the estimated rate of CDR progression is ~7.2% per year for those with a mean
age of ~75 years old at baseline, similar to the cohort in this proposal. Based on these estimates and assuming
similar rates of attrition we have experienced in the past, we estimate that out of 350 CN older adults who will
be assessed at baseline, at least 300 participants will continue to be assessed annually for CDR and cognition
during the 5 years of the grant with an average follow-up time of ~4 years. We predicted that 75 individuals will
progress to CDR >0 by the end of the funding cycle. This estimated number of individuals who will progress to
CDR >0 after baseline within the 5-year funding period will provide at least 80% statistical power to detect a
one-fold increase in the risk (e.g., HR of 2) of developing dementia for individuals with a fast increase in falls
over time (defined by the worst 50% on the rate of change) in comparison to those with slow or no change in
falls over time (defined by the best 50% on the rate of change). These power computations were based on a
log rank test at a 5% significance level and assumed an annual rate of 4.7% of CDR progression for individuals
with slow changes in disability over time.
Aim 2 examines the potential mechanisms for falls in preclinical AD using rs-fc.
Statistical Analysis Plan for Aim 2. We will conduct exploratory analyses to compare rs-fc in the CON
between the CN older adults with and without falls using a Student’s t-test or a Wilcoxon rank-sum test,
depending on the distribution of rs-fc. In addition, we will control for the age effect, preclinical stages of AD,
and other covariates (e.g., depression) using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). We will also compare domain-
specific and global cognitive measures, amyloid, and neurodegenerative measures between CN older adults
with and without falls using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
Power Analysis for Aim 2: Our other rs-fc studies suggest that at least 80% of subjects will participate in
rs-fc studies. We estimate that a total of 280 subjects will have at least baseline rs-fc assessments. Based on a
Student’s t-test, this sample size provides at least 80% power to detect a difference of 0.35 SD in rs-fc
composite scores between individuals with and without falls. This power analysis assumed 60% of out
participants will have falls, again based on the estimate from our own database.
DS supplement:
Statistical Analysis of Goal 1: To assess fall risk and functional mobility among adults aging with DS.
The differences in baseline characteristics will be explored using appropriate statistics (i.e., chi-square test,
Student’s t test, or Mann-Whitney U test).181 Differences in baseline characteristics across groups based on
demographic variables (age, gender, and race if applicable) will be compared using Fisher’s exact test for
categorical data.
Statistical Analysis of Goal 2: To investigate the prevalence of falls in aging adults with DS. We will
<<<PAGE 24>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
24
explore the distributions of fall severity scores among all participants. If the distribution is not normal, we will
seek appropriate transformations (e.g., Box-Cox).49 Subsequent analyses will be conducted on transformed
values. Falls severity will be explored in DS participants through group means (adjusted or transformed) using
analysis of covariance (ANOCOVA) models. ANOCOVA models for falls will be adjusted for other covariates
including the biological variable of sex, a fall risk composite score, and amyloid precursor protein (APP) on
chromosome 21 (obtained by the ABC-DS study), as well as possible interactions among these factors and
any identified preclinical stages of AD (from the ABC-DS neurological data and parent study data if applicable).
Statistical Analysis of Goal 3: To determine a power estimation for a future study. We will utilize the
variance of functional mobility and fall risk measures within our sample to estimate the magnitude of a clinically
significant difference between the measures, with an avoidance of a type 1 error. Our plan is also to determine
the necessary number of subjects needed to detect an effect between the fall and functional performance
outcomes and their relationship to preclinical AD.
Data Sharing
DS supplement:
De-identified data will be shared on an as needed basis according to the NIH data sharing policies.
Data will be shared using a controlled access database. De-identified data will be shared with, and received
from, Dr. Amy Bodde and Dr. Brian Helsel at The University of Kansas Medical Center. The information that
will be shared include the following: demographic information (age, gender, race/ethnicity, mild/moderate level
of disability, health history [comorbid conditions], orthostatic hypotension/blood pressure, living status), and the
Dementia Screening Questionnaire For Individuals With Intellectual Disabilities, Timed Up and Go, Waisman
Activities of Daily Living Scale, Grip strength via handheld dynamometer, and Chair Stand Test. This
information will be used to prepare manuscripts and conference presentations.
Strengths and Limitations
We have designed the study to have high levels of rigor including: (1) the scientific premise of falls during
preclinical AD is explicitly justified using high-quality studies and our own preliminary data; (2) the study is
designed to produce robust and unbiased results (e.g., blinded raters re-certified semi-annually, standard
operating procedures, conservative sample size estimates, plan to collect data from dropouts); (3) relevant
biological variables (e.g., sex) and important fall covariates are justified and included; and (4) all procedures for
clinical and biomarker data collection are consistent with National Alzheimer’s Collaborating Center (NACC)182
and Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative-2 (ADNI-2)183 to ensure authentication. The study is designed
to generate reproducible data (standardized protocols, assessments, and commercially available monitoring)
and provide a foundation for future studies.
This study benefits from the existing infrastructure already in place at the Knight ADRC. The Knight
ADRC provides a unique opportunity to monitor falls and functional mobility in a large, well-characterized
cohort of CN older adults. Potential pitfalls. In anticipation of problems, we have designed several safeguards.
For example: (1) Although we have planned for attrition, dropout from the Knight ADRC longitudinal studies
could impact the findings of this study. To prevent missing data, we will train and certify all in-home OT raters
to conduct the CDR in the home. If participants refuse clinical studies but agree to home assessment, they will
be retained. (2) If older adults are not compliant with fall monitoring over time, we have piloted an automated
phone response system module in REDCap to ascertain falls weekly or daily (depending on participant
preference). The system is in use in our current trial and is immediately deployable. A response of fall
immediately connects participants to the research coordinator. (3) It may be possible that there is not an
increased risk of falling during the preclinical period of AD. It may be that falls are only a sensitive (not specific)
predictor of preclinical AD. Understanding the pattern of behavioral change may not only be useful to
understand preclinical AD, but can also be used as a comparator to the preclinical stages of other neurological
disorders such as Parkinson’s disease. Information on fall rates and mechanisms could be instructive for future
treatment targets. (4) Falling is a syndrome highly associated with general aging and may be difficult to
differentiate from aging-related phenotypes such as frailty. We will collect important covariates to test these
relationships in a cohort of older adults without preclinical AD. It is possible that comorbid medical conditions,
substance abuse, and other fall risk factors found in the general population could introduce bias. Therefore, we
will control for these covariates in statistical analyses.
<<<PAGE 25>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
25
DS supplement:
This supplement also has high levels of rigor, including: (1) the scientific premise of falls in adults aging
with DS is explicitly justified using high-quality studies generated by the parent study and B. Ances affiliation
with the ABC-DS study; (2) the study is designed to produce robust and unbiased results (e.g., standard
operating procedures, conservative sample size estimates, plan to collect data from dropouts); (3) relevant
biological variables (e.g., sex) and important fall covariates are justified and included.
This supplement benefits from the existing infrastructure already in place at the Ances clinic and Stark
Participation, Environment and Performance Laboratory. The Participation, Environment and Performance
Laboratory provides a unique opportunity to monitor falls and functional mobility in a population of adults with
Down syndrome. Potential pitfalls. In anticipation of problems, we have designed several safeguards. For
example: (1) Although we have planned for attrition, dropout from the ABC-DS study or individuals enrolled
within the community could impact the findings of this study. To prevent missing data, if aging adults with DS
are not compliant with fall monitoring over time, we have piloted an automated phone response system module
in REDCap to ascertain falls weekly or daily (depending on participant preference). The system is in use in
within the parent study and is immediately deployable. (3) It may be possible that there is not an increased risk
of falling during the 6-month observation period. Understanding the pattern of behavioral functional change
may not only be useful to understand the pathway to preclinical AD, and the information on fall rates and
mechanisms could be instructive for future study design. (4) It is possible that comorbid medical conditions,
substance abuse, and other fall risk factors found in the general population could introduce bias. Therefore, we
will control for these covariates in statistical analyses.
Potential Benefits, Risks, and Alternatives
Benefits
Participants will be provided with the results of the assessments conducted during their annual in-home visit.
This study will provide researchers with a better understanding of the longitudinal changes that older adults
experience during the pre-clinical course of AD. Advances in this area have the potential to improve quality of
life for older adults and allow physicians and researchers to better identify older adults in the preclinical phases
of AD. A better understanding of falls and functional mobility in individuals at risk for AD is needed for informing
interventional studies.
DS supplement:
Advances in this area have the potential to provide physicians and researchers with a better
understanding of falls and functional mobility in individuals aging with DS who are at risk for AD. This
information may inform interventional studies and improve quality of life for aging adults with DS.
Risks
Potential risks of research participation—physical, p sychological, financial, and legal risks among others—are
considered minimal (45CFR46.404). In-home evaluations and assessments of barriers may result in fatigue or
aggravation. In addition, some questions may touch on emotionally sensitive issues that could cause anxiety or
other forms of emotional stress. The performance-based testing involves observation of everyday activities,
which may result in fatigue or embarrassment. In rare instances, the evaluation protocol could result in a fall.
Participants will be told that their involvement in this research study is voluntary and that they may choose not
to participate or withdraw their consent at any time. Withdrawal from the study will not at any time affect the
commitment of the clinician to administer care, and there will be no penalty or loss of benefits to which
participants are otherwise entitled. Participants who undergo the study visits will be given the option to
reschedule the visit or take a break at any time during the study if necessary. There is little legal risk to
participating in this research. All research-related information will be kept confidential and accessible only to
authorized members of the research team.
Minimization of Risks and Confidentiality
We are a HIPAA-covered entity and comply with all HIPAA regulations. To protect against and minimize
potential risks, participants will be carefully screened and evaluated for eligibility by the research coordinator.
<<<PAGE 26>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
26
To avoid or minimize symptoms of fatigue, agitation, or emotional distress due to testing, participants
will be instructed to notify the rater or interventionist if they experience any discomfort. They will also be
periodically questioned about their tolerance for the tests/intervention. Testing and interviews will be terminated
if participants develop fatigue, agitation, or emotional distress. Risks during the home visit will be minimized by
having trained interventionists available to monitor safety during the home assessment. When photographing
the home, only environmental barriers and changes will be collected. Images of participants will not be
collected.
An ID number will be assigned to each participant. All data collected from a participant will be labeled
with the ID number. All participant electronic and hard-copy data will be kept under double-lock protection. All
hard-copy forms that contain personal identifiers (e.g., name, address, phone numbers) will be stored in a
separate locked file drawer under double-lock protection. No publication or presentation of the study data will
uniquely identify or provide sufficient information to uniquely identify participants.
To guard against unauthorized data access, all shared-us e computer systems at Washington University
School of Medicine are protected with passwords, which are changed at 4-month intervals. Only individuals
with a particular "need to know" status are given access, and system privileges are carefully restricted. All
personal computers to be used in the Administrative Unit are located within a secure area, and the system is
locked when not in use. SAS and SPSS software packages will be used for data management and analysis.
Datasets generated from these programs will be password protected, which will make accessing study data
difficult even in the event of unauthorized computer access. Systems connected to the Ethernet are carefully
controlled, and all systems without Ethernet access control are insulated from the backbone by bridges or
routers. The Ethernet cable itself is routed only through secure passageways.
Data are directly entered into a REDCap database. 166 REDCap servers are securely housed in an
onsite, limited-access data center managed by the Division of Biostatistics at Washington University. All Web-
based information transmission is encrypted. All data are stored on a private, firewall-protected network. All
users are given individual user IDs and passwords, and their access is restricted on a role-specific basis.
REDCap was developed specifically around HIPAA security guidelines and is implemented and maintained
according to Washington University guidelines. Study data will be collected via tablet in the field and managed
using REDCap electronic data-capture tools hosted at Washington University. REDCap is a secure, Web-
based application designed to support data capture for research studies.
Adverse Event Reporting and Safety Monitoring
All serious adverse events (SAEs) will be reported to the HRPO in the following time frames: (a) death
immediately; (b) life-threatening, within 7 calendar days; (c) all other SAEs, within 15 calendar days using the
electronic serious adverse event reporting system. Should there be an SAE that occurs that increases the risks
to the participants, the study will be stopped, an investigation will be conducted, and a findings report will be
generated before the study is resumed.
Dr. Stark will be responsible for reviewing study progress and outcomes including recruitment, data
quality, and safety. Quarterly reports will be reviewed by the study investigators. Because risk in the proposed
study is considered minimal, the data monitoring plan will include continuous, close monitoring by the study
investigator with prompt reporting of any adverse events. In this study, Dr. Stark will monitor the study for
adverse advents and adherence to the protocol and safety.
Indemnity
Washington University School of Medicine is responsible for any non-negligent damage incurred as a result of
participating in the trial. The indemnity is renewed on an annual basis. Washington University School of
Medicine assures that it will continue renewal of the indemnity for the duration of the trial.
Ethics and Dissemination
This protocol and the template informed consent forms will be reviewed and approved by the Washington
University IRB with respect to scientific content and compliance with applicable research and human subjects
regulations. All study personnel involved in the conduct of this research will receive the required education on
the protection of human participant rights.
<<<PAGE 27>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
27
Authorship Eligibility and Contributorship
Authorship for this study will be given to key personnel involved in study design, recruitment, data collection,
and data analysis. There are no publication restrictions, and no professional writers will be involved in the
generation of the manuscript. S. Stark and B. Ances were responsible for conceptualizing study design. S.
Stark managed patient safety protocol and IRB compliance. S. Stark and B. Ances were responsible for
recruitment, enrollment, data collection, and editing the protocol.
DS supplement:
S. Washington, R. Bollinger, S. Stark and B. Ances will be responsible for conceptualizing study design.
S. Washington and R. Bollinger will manage patient safety protocol and IRB compliance. S. Washington, R.
Bollinger, S.Stark, and B. Ances will be responsible for recruitment, enrollment, data collection, and editing the
protocol.
All authors agree to be accountable for the accuracy and integrity of all aspects of the trial.
Funding
Competing Interests
None of the authors have conflicts of interest to disclose.
<<<PAGE 28>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
28
References
1. 2020 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures . Alzheimer's & Dementia 2020;16:391-460.
2. Keleman A, Wisch JK, Bollinger RM, et al. Falls associate with neurodegenerative changes in ATN
framework of Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Alzheimer's disease 2020:1-8.
3. Handen BL, Lott IT, Christian BT, et al. The Al zheimer's Biomarker Consortium-Down Syndrome:
Rationale and methodology. Alzheimers Dement (Amst) 2020;12:e12065-e.
4. Stark S, Roe C, Grant E, Morris J. P1-201: Risk  of Falls Among Older Adults with Preclinical
Alzheimer's Disease. Alzheimer's & Dementia 2011;7:S176-S.
5. Allali G, Launay CP, Blumen HM, et al. Falls, Cognitive Impairment, and Gait Performance: Results
From the GOOD Initiative.
6. Carfì A, Antocicco M, Brandi V, et al. Characteristics of Adults with Down Syndrome: Prevalence of
Age-Related Conditions. Frontiers in Medicine 2014;1.
7. Capone GA-O, Chicoine B, Bulova P, et al. Co-o ccurring medical conditions in adults with Down
syndrome: A systematic review toward the development of health care guidelines.
8. Van Pelt KL, Koehl L, Caban-Holt A, Anderson-Moone y A, Head E, Schmitt FA. Feasibility of dual-
task gait to estimate Alzheimer's related cognitive decline in Down syndrome. Alzheimer's & Dementia:
Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring 2020;12:e12092.
9. Tinetti ME, Williams C. Falls, injuries due to fa lls, and the risk of admission to a nursing home. New
England Journal of Medicine 1997;337:1279-84.
10. Tinetti ME, Speechley M, Ginter SF. Risk fact ors for falls among elderly persons living in the
community. New England Journal of Medicine 1988;319:1701-7.
11. Sattin RW. Falls among older persons: a public hea lth perspective. Annual Review of Public Health
1992;13:489-508.
12. Sattin RW, Rodriguez JG, DeVito CA, Wingo PA. Ho me environmental hazards and the risk of fall
injury events among community-dwelling older persons. Study to Assess Falls Among the Elderly (SAFE)
Group. J Am Geriatr Soc 1998;46:669-76.
13. Wajda DA, Mirelman A, Hausdorff JM, Sosnoff JJ. Intervention modalities for targeting cognitive-
motor interference in individuals with neurodegenerative disease: a systematic review. Expert Rev Neurother
2017;17:251-61.
14. Anstey KJ, Von Sanden C, Luszcz MA. An 8 ‐Year Prospective Study of the Relationship Between
Cognitive Performance and Falling in Very Old Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2006;54:1169-76.
15. Eggenberger P, Wolf M, Schumann M, de Brui n ED. Exergame and Balance Training Modulate
Prefrontal Brain Activity during Walking and Enhance Executive Function in Older Adults. Front Aging
Neurosci 2016;8:66.
16. Montero-Odasso M, Oteng-Amoako A, Speechley M,  et al. The motor signature of mild cognitive
impairment: Results from the gait and brain study. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences
and Medical Sciences 2014.
17. Albers MW, Gilmore GC, Kaye J, et al. At th e interface of sensory and motor dysfunctions and
Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers & Dementia 2015;11:70-98.
18. Morris JC, Roe CM, Xiong C, et al. APOE predicts amyloid-beta but not tau Alzheimer pathology in
cognitively normal aging. Annals of Neurology 2010;67:122-31.
19. Johnson SC, Christian BT, Okonkwo OC, et al. Amyloid burden and neural function in people at risk for
Alzheimer's Disease. Neurobiology of Aging 2014;35:576-84.
20. Sperling RA, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, et al. Toward defi ning the preclinical stages of Alzheimer's disease:
Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic
guidelines for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's & Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer's Association
2011;7:280-92.
21. Bateman RJ, Xiong CJ, Benzinger TLS, et al. Clini cal and Biomarker Changes in Dominantly Inherited
Alzheimer's Disease. New England Journal of Medicine 2012;367:795-804.
<<<PAGE 29>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
29
22. Vos SJB, Xiong CJ, Visser PJ, et al. Preclinical Alzheimer's disease and its outcome: a longitudinal
cohort study. Lancet Neurol 2013;12:957-65.
23. Jack CR, Jr, Bennett DA, Blennow K, et al. A/T/N:  An unbiased descriptive classification scheme for
Alzheimer disease biomarkers. Neurology 2016;87:539-47.
24. McGough EL, Lin S-Y, Belza B, et  al. A scoping review of physical performance outcome measures
used in exercise interventions for older adults with alzheimer disease and related dementias. Journal of Geriatric
Physical Therapy 2017.
25. Zhou J, Liu S, Ng KK, Wang J. Applications  of Resting-State Functional Connectivity to
Neurodegenerative Disease. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 2017;27:663-83.
26. Woollacott M, Shumway-Cook A. A ttention and the control of posture and gait: a review of an
emerging area of research. Gait Posture 2002;16:1-14.
27. Stark SL, Roe C, Grant E, Morris JC. Risk of Fa lls in Older Adults with Preclinical Alzheimer's
Disease.  Alzheimer's Association International Conference on Alzheimer's Disease Paris, France2011.
28. Brier MR, Thomas JB, Snyder AZ, et al. Loss of intr anetwork and internetwork resting state functional
connections with Alzheimer's disease progression. Journal of Neuroscience 2012;32:8890-9.
29. Balota DA, Tse CS, Hutchison KA, Spieler DH, Duchek JM, Morris JC. Predicting conversion to
dementia of the Alzheimer's type in a healthy control sample: the power of errors in Stroop color naming.
Psychol Aging 2010;25:208-18.
30. Duchek JM, Balota DA, Thomas JB, et al. Relati onship between Stroop performance and resting state
functional connectivity in cognitively normal older adults. Neuropsychology 2013;27:516.
31. Hocking DR, Menant JC, Kirk HE, Lord S, Porter MA. Gait profiles as indicators of domain-specific
impairments in executive control across neurodevelopmental disorders. Research in developmental disabilities
2014;35:203-14.
32. Gonçalves AS, Carvalho CL, Ramos AS, et al. Role  of gait and speed performance in predicting
cognitive decline and dementia in people with Down syndrome: Preliminary findings: Developing topics.
Alzheimer's & Dementia 2020;16:e047466.
33. Stark SL, Roe CM, Grant EA, et al. Preclinical  Alzheimer disease and risk of falls. Neurology
2013;81:437-43.
34. Snyder HM, Bain LJ, Brickman AM, et al. Furthe r understanding the connection between Alzheimer's
disease and Down syndrome. Alzheimer's & Dementia 2020;16:1065-77.
35. Keleman AA, Bollinger RM, Ances BM, Stark SL. Amyloid accumulation associated with worse
performance of complex task.  2021 Alzheimer's Association International Conference; 2021: ALZ.
36. Mank A, van Maurik IS, Bakker ED, et al. Iden tifying relevant outcomes in the progression of
Alzheimer's disease; what do patients and care partners want to know about prognosis? Alzheimer's &
Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 2021;7:e12189.
37. Berg L, McKeel DW, Jr, Miller J, et al. Clin icopathologic studies in cognitively healthy aging and
alzheimer disease: Relation of histologic markers to dementia severity, age, sex, and apolipoprotein e genotype.
Archives of Neurology 1998;55:326-35.
38. Coats MA, Morris JC. Antecedent biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease: The Adult Children Study.
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology 2005;18:242-4.
39. Morris JC. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR ): Current version and scoring rules Neurology
1993;43:2412-4.
40. Movement Disorder Society Ta sk Force on Rating Scales for Parkinson's Disease. The Unified
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS): status and recommendations. Mov Disord 2003;18:738-50.
41. Appelbaum PS, Grisso T. MacArthur  competence assessment tool for clinical research (MacCAT-CR):
professional resource press/professional resource exchange; 2001.
42. Berg L, McKeel DW, Jr., Miller JP, Baty J, Mo rris JC. Neuropathological indexes of Alzheimer's
disease in demented and nondemented persons aged 80 years and older. Arch Neurol 1993;50:349-58.
<<<PAGE 30>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
30
43. Storandt M, Hill RD. Very mild senile demen tia of the Alzheimer type. II. Psychometric test
performance. Arch Neurol 1989;46:383-6.
44. Su Y, D'Angelo GM, Vlassenko AG, et al. Quantitativ e analysis of PiB-PET with FreeSurfer ROIs. PloS
one 2013;8:e73377.
45. Hughes CP, Berg L, Danziger WL, Coben LA, Mart in RL. A new clinical scale for the staging of
dementia. The British Journal of Psychiatry 1982;140:566-72.
46. Morris JC, Storandt M, Miller J, et al. Mild cognitive impairment represents early-stage Alzheimer
disease. Archives of Neurology 2001;58:397-405.
47. Morris JC, Ernesto C, Schafer K, et  al. Clinical Dementia Rating training and reliability in multicenter
studies. Neurology 1997;48:1508-10.
48. Morris JC, Weintraub S, Chui HC, et al. The Unifor m Data Set (UDS): Clinical and Cognitive Variables
and Descriptive Data From Alzheimer Disease Centers. Alzheimer Disease & Associated Disorders
2006;20:210-6 10.1097/01.wad.0000213865.09806.92.
49. Alden D, Austin, C. & Sturgeon, R. . A correlation between the geriatric depression scale long and short
forms Journal Of Gerontology 1989;44:124-25.
50. Vetter NJ, Ford D. Anxiety and depression scores in  elderly fallers. International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry 1989;4:159-63.
51. Yesavage JA, Brink, T.L., et al. Development and valid ation of a geriatric depression screening scale: A
preliminary report. Journal of Psychiatric Research 1983;17:37-49.
52. Hixson JE, Vernier DT. Restric tion isotyping of human apolipoprotein E by gene amplification and
cleavage with HhaI. J Lipid Res 1990;31:545-8.
53. Johnson DK, Storandt M, Morris JC, Langford ZD, Galv in JE. Cognitive profiles in dementia Alzheimer
disease vs healthy brain aging. Neurology 2008;71:1783-9.
54. Johnson DK, Storandt M, Morris JC, Galvin JE. Long itudinal study of the transition from healthy aging
to Alzheimer disease. Archives of neurology 2009;66:1254-9.
55. Morris JC, Roe CM, Grant EA, et al. Pittsbur gh compound B imaging and prediction of progression
from cognitive normality to symptomatic Alzheimer disease. Archives of Neurology 2009;66:1469-75.
56. Storandt M, Mintun MA, Head D,  Morris JC. Cognitive decline and brain volume loss as signatures of
cerebral amyloid-β peptide deposition identified with Pittsburgh compound B: Cognitive decline associated
with Aβ deposition. Archives of Neurology 2009;66:1476-81.
57. Duchek JM, Balota DA, Tse C-S, Holtzman DM, Fa gan AM, Goate AM. The utility of intraindividual
variability in selective attention tasks as an early marker for Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychology
2009;23:746.
58. Tse C-S, Balota DA, Yap MJ, Duchek JM, McCabe  DP. Effects of healthy aging and early stage
dementia of the Alzheimer's type on components of response time distributions in three attention tasks.
Neuropsychology 2010;24:300.
59. Hutchison KA, Balota DA, Ducheck JM. The utility of Stroop task switching as a marker for early-stage
Alzheimer's disease. Psychology and aging 2010;25:545.
60. Huff MJ, Balota DA, Minear M, Aschenbrenner AJ , Duchek JM. Dissociative global and local task-
switching costs across younger adults, middle-aged adults, older adults, and very mild Alzheimer’s disease
individuals. Psychology and aging 2015;30:727.
61. Bangert AS, Balota DA. Keep up the pace: declines in simple repetitive timing differentiate healthy
aging from the earliest stages of Alzheimer's disease. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society
2012;18:1052-63.
62. Aschenbrenner AJ, Balota DA, Tse C-S, et al. Alzh eimer disease biomarkers, attentional control, and
semantic memory retrieval: Synergistic and mediational effects of biomarkers on a sensitive cognitive measure
in non-demented older adults. Neuropsychology 2015;29:368.
<<<PAGE 31>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
31
63. Joshi AD, Pontecorvo MJ, Clark CM, et al. Performance characteristics of amyloid PET with florbetapir
F 18 in patients with Alzheimer's disease and cognitively normal subjects. Journal of Nuclear Medicine
2012;53:378-84.
64. Carrillo MC, Blackwell A, Hampel H, et al. Early ri sk assessment for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's
& Dementia 2009;5:182-96.
65. Craig-Schapiro R, Fagan AM, Holtzman DM. Biom arkers of Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiology of
Disease 2009;35:128-40.
66. Wang L, Benzinger T, Hassenstab J. Sp atially distinct atrophy is linked to β-amyloid and tau in
preclinical alzheimer disease. Neurology 2015;84:1254-60.
67. Fagan AM, Roe CM, Xiong C, Mintun MA, Mo rris JC, Holtzman DM. Cerebrospinal fluid
tau/βamyloid42 ratio as a prediction of cognitive decline in nondemented older adults. Archives of Neurology
2007;64:343-9.
68. Shulman GL, Pope DL, Astafiev SV, McAvoy MP, Snyder AZ, Corbetta M. Right hemisphere
dominance during spatial selective attention and target detection occurs outside the dorsal frontoparietal
network. J Neurosci 2010;30:3640-51.
69. Hassenstab J, Ruvolo D, Jasielec M, Xiong C, Grant E, Morris JC. Absence of practice effects in
preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychology 2015;29:940.
70. Wechsler D, Stone CP. Manual: Wechsler Memory  Scale. New York, NY: Psychological Corp; 1973.
71. Grober E, Buschke H, Crystal H, Bang S, Dresne r R. Screening for dementia by memory testing.
Neurology 1988;38:900-3.
72. MacLeod CM. The Stroop task: The “gold standard” of  attentional measures. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 1992;121:12-4.
73. Simon JR. Reactions toward the source of stimulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology
1969;81:174-6.
74. Schmitter-Edgecombe M, Langill M. Costs of a predictable switch between simple cognitive tasks
following severe closed-head injury. Neuropsychology 2006;20:675-84.
75. O'Connor SM, Baweja HS, Goble DJ. Validating the BT rackS Balance Plate as a low cost alternative for
the measurement of sway-induced center of pressure. Journal of Applied Biomechanics 2016;49:4142-5.
76. Levy SS, Thralls KJ, Kviatkovsky SA. Validity and re liability of a portable balance tracking system,
BTrackS, in older adults. Journal of geriatric physical therapy 2018;41:102-7.
77. Rikli RE, Jones CJ. Functional f itness normative scores for community-residing older adults, ages 60-
94. Journal of Aging and Physical Activity 1999;7:162-81.
78. Viccaro LJ, Perera S, Studenski SA. Is Timed Up a nd Go better than gait speed in predicting health,
function, and falls in older adults? J Am Geriatr Soc 2011;59:887-92.
79. Ward RE, Leveille SG, Beauchamp MK, et al. Functiona l performance as a predictor of injurious falls in
older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2015;63:315-20.
80. O'Shea SD, Taylor NF, Paratz JD. Measuring musc le strength for people with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: retest reliability of hand-held dynamometry. Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation 2007;88:32-6.
81. Ferris FL, Kassoff A, Bresnick G, Bailey I. New vi sual acuity charts for clinical research. Am J
Opthamol 1982;94:91-6.
82. Pelli DG, Robson JG, Wilkins AJ. The design of a new letter chart for measuring contrast sensitivity.
Clinical Vision Science 1988;2:187-99.
83. Kastenbauer T, Sauseng S, Brath H, Abrahamian H,  Irsigler K. The value of the Rydel-Seiffer tuning
fork as a predictor of diabetic polyneuropathy compared with a neurothesiometer. Diabetic Medicine
2004;21:563-7.
84. Deshpande N, Ferrucci L, Metter J, et al. Associati on of lower limb cutaneous sensitivity with gait speed
in the elderly: the health ABC study. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2008;87:921-8.
<<<PAGE 32>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
32
85. Garrow AP, Boulton AJ. Vibration perception threshold- -a valuable assessment of neural dysfunction in
people with diabetes. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2006;22:411-9.
86. Tinetti ME. Performance ‐oriented assessment of mobility problems in elderly patients. J Am Geriatr
Soc 1986;34:119-26.
87. Podsiadlo D, Richardson S. The timed "Up & Go": a te st of basic functional mobility for frail elderly
persons. J Am Geriatr Soc 1991;39:142-8.
88. Patel P, Lamar M, Bhatt T. Effect of type of  cognitive task and walking speed on cognitive-motor
interference during dual-task walking. Neuroscience 2014;260:140-8.
89. Shumway-Cook A, Brauer S, Woollacott M. Predicti ng the probability for falls in community-dwelling
older adults using the Timed Up & Go Test. Physical Therapy 2000;80:896.
90. Mancini M, Horak FB. The relevance of clinical balance assessment tools to differentiate balance
deficits. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 2010;46:239-48.
91. Vanhoutte EK, Faber CG, Van Nes SI, et al. Modify ing the Medical Research Council grading system
through Rasch analyses. Brain 2011;135:1639-49.
92. Fenter C, Bellew JW, Pitts TA, Kay RE. Reliabi lity of stabilised commercial dynamometers for
measuring hip abduction strength: a pilot study. Br J Sports Med 2003;37:331-4.
93. Goble DJ, Baweja HS. Postural sway normative data across the adult lifespan: Results from 6280
individuals on the Balance Tracking System balance test. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2018;18:1225-9.
94. Hausdorff JM, Buchman AS. What Links Gait Speed and MCI With Dementia? A Fresh Look at the
Association Between Motor and Cognitive Function. The Journals of Gerontology: Series A 2013;68:409-11.
95. Nadkarni NK, Perera S, Snitz BE, et  al. Association of brain amyloid-β with slow gait in elderly
individuals without dementia: Influence of cognition and apolipoprotein e ε4 genotype. JAMA Neurology
2017;74:82-90.
96. Sheridan PL, Hausdorff JM. The role of higher-leve l cognitive function in gait: executive dysfunction
contributes to fall risk in Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 2007;24:125-37.
97. Sheridan PL, Solomont J, Kowall N, Hausdorff JM. Influence of executive function on locomotor
function: Divided attention increases gait variability in Alzheimer's disease. J Am Geriatr Soc 2003;51:1633-7.
98. Montero-Odasso M, Casas A, Hansen KT, et al . Quantitative gait analysis under dual-task in older
people with mild cognitive impairment: A reliability study. Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation
2009;6:35.
99. Tinetti M, Williams T, Mayewski R. Fall risk in dex for elderly patients based on number of chronic
disabilities. Am J Med 1986;80:429-34.
100. Sterke CS, Huisman SL, van Beeck EF, Looman CW, van der Cammen TJ. Is the Tinetti Performance
Oriented Mobility Assessment (POMA) a feasible and valid predictor of short-term fall risk in nursing home
residents with dementia? International psychogeriatrics 2010;22:254-63.
101. Mackenzie L, Byles J, D'Este C. Validation of self -reported fall events in intervention studies. Clin
Rehabil 2006;20:331-9.
102. Ganz DA, Higashi T, Rubenstein LZ. Monitoring fa lls in cohort studies of community-dwelling older
people: effect of the recall interval. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005;53:2190-4.
103. Hauer K, Lamb SE, Jorstad EC, Todd C, Becker C,  PROFANE-Group. Systematic review of definitions
and methods of measuring falls in randomised controlled fall prevention trials. Age Ageing 2006;35:5-10.
104. Lamb SE, Jørstad-Stein EC, Hauer K, Becker C. Development of a Common Outcome Data Set for Fall
Injury Prevention Trials: The Prevention of Falls Network Europe Consensus. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005;53:1618-
22.
105. Stark SL, Silianoff TJ, Kim HL, Co nte JW, Morris JC. Tailored calendar journals to ascertain falls
among older adults. OTJR: Occupation, Participation and Health 2015;35:53-9.
106. Lach H, Reed A, Arfken C, et al. Falls in the elde rly: reliability of a classification system. J Am Geriatr
Soc 1991;39:197-202.
<<<PAGE 33>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
33
107. Lusardi MM, Fritz S, Middleton A, et al. Deter mining Risk of Falls in Community Dwelling Older
Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis Using Posttest Probability. Journal of Geriatric Physical
Therapy (2001) 2017;40:1-36.
108. Blow FC, Brower KJ, Schulenberg JE, Demo-Dan anberg LM, Young JP, Beresford TP. The Michigan
Alcoholism Screening Test – Geriatric Version (MAST-G): A new elderly-specific screening instrument.
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 1992;16:372.
109. Brown JS, Vittinghoff E, Wyman JF, et al. Urinary In continence: Does it Increase Risk for Falls and
Fractures? J Am Geriatr Soc 2000;48:721-5.
110. Gandek B, Ware JE, Aaronson NK, et al. Cross-valid ation of item selection and scoring for the SF-12
Health Survey in nine countries: results from the IQOLA Project. International Quality of Life Assessment.
Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 1998;51:1171-8.
111. Fillenbaum CG. Multidimensional Functional Asse ssment of Older Adults. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Inc. ; 1988.
112. Sibley KM, Voth J, Munce SE, Straus SE, Jaglal SB. Chronic disease and falls in community-dwelling
Canadians over 65 years old: a population-based study exploring associations with number and pattern of
chronic conditions. BMC geriatrics 2014;14:22.
113. Lee JS, Kwok T, Leung P, Woo J. Medical illnesses ar e more important than medications as risk factors
of falls in older community dwellers? A cross-sectional study. Age and ageing 2006;35:246-51.
114. Clemson L, Roland M, Cumming RG. Types of h azards in the homes of elderly people. The
Occupational Therapy Journal of Research 1997;17:200-13.
115. Kempen GI, Yardley L, Van Haastregt JC, et al. The Short FES-I: a shortened version of the falls
efficacy scale-international to assess fear of falling. Age and Ageing 2008;37:45-50.
116. Cummings SR, Nevitt MC, Kidd S. Forgetting falls: The li mited accuracy of recall of falls in the elderly.
Journal of the American Geriatric Society 1988;36:613-6.
117. Stark S, Somerville E, Keglovits M, et al. Feasib ility Trial of Tailored Home Modifications: Process
Outcomes. American Journal of Occupational Therapy 2018;72:7201205020p1–p10.
118. Tinetti ME, Doucette J, Claus E, Marattoli R. Ri sk factors for serious injury during falls by older
persons in the community. Journal of the American Geriatric Society 1995;43:1214-21.
119. Rubenstein LZ. Falls in older pe ople: Epidemiology, risk factors and strategies for prevention. Age and
Ageing 2006;35:ii37-ii41.
120. Lord SR, Menz HB, Tiedemann A. A Physiological  Profile Approach to Falls Risk Assessment and
Prevention. Physical Therapy 2003;83:237-52.
121. Gillespie LD, Robertson MC, Gillespie WJ, et al. Interventions for preventing falls in older people
living in the community. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;2.
122. Rubenstein L, Josephson K. Falls and their preven tion in elderly people: what does the evidence show?
The Medical clinics of North America 2006;90:807-24.
123. Talbot LA, Musiol RJ, Witham EK, Metter EJ. Falls in young, middle-aged and older community
dwelling adults: perceived cause, environmental factors and injury. BMC Public Health 2005;5:86.
124. Ho KH, Matsubayashi K, Wada T, Kimura M, Ki ta T, Saijoh K. Factors associated with ADL
dependence: A comparative study of residential care home and community-dwelling elderly in Japan. Geriatrics
and Gerontology International 2002;2:80-6.
125. Freeman EE, Munoz B, Rubin G, West SK. Visual fiel d loss increases the risk of falls in older adults:
the Salisbury eye evaluation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:4445-50.
126. Brannan S, Dewar C, Sen J, Clarke  D, Marshall T, Murray PI. A prospective study of the rate of falls
before and after cataract surgery. Br J Ophthalmol 2003;87:560-2.
127. Kulmala J, Viljanen A, Sipila S,  et al. Poor vision accompanied with other sensory impairments as a
predictor of falls in older women. Age Ageing 2009;38:162-7.
128. Tinetti ME, Mendes de Leon CF, Dou cette JT, Baker DI. Fear of falling and fall-related efficacy in
relationship to functioning among community-living elders. J Gerontol 1994;49:M140-7.
<<<PAGE 34>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
34
129. Vellas BJ, Wayne SJ, Romero LJ, Ba umgartner RN, Garry PJ. Fear of falling and restriction of mobility
in elderly fallers. Age Ageing 1997;26:189-93.
130. Mukamal KJ, Mittleman MA, Longstreth Jr WT, Ne wman AB, Fried LP, Siscovick DS. Self-Reported
Alcohol Consumption and Falls in Older Adults: Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Analyses of the
Cardiovascular Health Study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2004;52:1174-9.
131. Hartikainen S, Lonnroos E, Louhivuor i K. Medication as a risk factor for falls: critical systematic
review. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2007;62:1172-81.
132. Hanlon JT, Boudreau RM, Roumani YF, et al. Nu mber and dosage of central nervous system
medications on recurrent falls in community elders: the Health, Aging and Body Composition study. Jourals of
Gerontology Series A: Biological and Medical Sciences 2009;64:492-8.
133. Northridge ME, Nevitt MC, Kelsey JL, Link B. Home h azards and falls in the elderly: the role of health
and functional status. Am J Public Health 1995;85:509-15.
134. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and utility of a self-report version of PRIME-MD: the
PHQ primary care study. Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. JAMA
1999;282:1737-44.
135. Bohannon RW. Hand-grip dynamometry predicts future outcomes in aging adults. Journal of Geriatric
Physical Therapy 2008;31:3-10.
136. Rogers J, Holm M. Performance Assessment of  Self-care Skills. Unpublished performance test.
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh; 1989.
137. Clemson L, Cumming RG, Heard R. The development of  an assessment to evaluate behavioral factors
associated with falling. American Journal of Occupational Therapy 2003;57:380-8.
138. Doty RL, Shaman P, Kimmelman CP, Dann MS. Univer sity of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test: a
rapid quantitative olfactory function test for the clinic. Laryngoscope 1984;94:176-8.
139. Ventry IM, Weinstein BE. Identification of el derly people with hearing problems. ASHA 1983;25:37-
42.
140. Gershon RC, Wagster MV, Hendrie HC, Fox NA, C ook KF, Nowinski CJ. NIH toolbox for assessment
of neurological and behavioral function. Neurology 2013;80:S2-6.
141. Cyranowski JM, Zill N, Bode R, et al. Assessing so cial support, companionship, and distress: National
Institute of Health (NIH) Toolbox Adult Social Relationship Scales. Health Psychol 2013;32:293-301.
142. Hays RD, Bjorner JB, Revicki DA, Spritzer KL, Ce lla D. Development of physical and mental health
summary scores from the patient-reported outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS) global items.
Qual Life Res 2009;18:873-80.
143. Campbell-Sills L, Stein MB. Psyc hometric analysis and refinement of the Connor-davidson Resilience
Scale (CD-RISC): Validation of a 10-item measure of resilience. J Trauma Stress 2007;20:1019-28.
144. Russell D, Peplau LA, Ferguson ML. Developing a measure of loneliness. J Pers Assess 1978;42:290-4.
145. Hahn EA, Devellis RF, Bode RK, et al. Measuri ng social health in the patient-reported outcomes
measurement information system (PROMIS): item bank development and testing. Qual Life Res 2010;19:1035-
44.
146. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: vali dity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen
Intern Med 2001;16:606-13.
147. Pilkonis PA, Choi SW, Reise SP, et al. Item banks for measuring emotional distress from the Patient-
Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS(R)): depression, anxiety, and anger.
Assessment 2011;18:263-83.
148. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxiety and de pression scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1983;67:361-
70.
149. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a
new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res 1989;28:193-213.
150. Chiba Y, Shimada A, Yoshida F, et al. Risk of fall for individuals with intellectual disability. American
journal on intellectual and developmental disabilities 2009;114:225-36.
<<<PAGE 35>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
35
151. Weinstein BE, Spitzer JB, Ventry IM. Test-retest re liability of the Hearing Handicap Inventory for the
Elderly. Ear and hearing 1986;7:295-9.
152. Juraschek SP, Taylor AA, Wright Jr JT, et al. Orthostatic hypotension, cardiovascular outcomes, and
adverse events: results from SPRINT. Hypertension 2020;75:660-7.
153. Krinsky ‐McHale SJ, Silverman W, Gordon J, Devenny DA, Oley N, Abramov I. Vision deficits in
adults with Down syndrome. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities 2014;27:247-63.
154. Krinsky-McHale SJ, Jenkins EC, Zigman WB, Silverma n W. Ophthalmic disorders in adults with Down
syndrome. Current Gerontology and Geriatrics Research 2012;2012.
155. Niemczyk J, von Gontard A, Equit M, Medoff D, Wa gner C, Curfs L. Incontinence in persons with
Down Syndrome. Neurourology and Urodynamics 2017;36:1550-6.
156. Lotan M, Ljunggren EA, Johnsen TB, Defrin R, Pick  CG, Strand LI. A Modified Version of the Non-
Communicating Children Pain Checklist-Revised, Adapted to Adults With Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities: Sensitivity to Pain and Internal Consistency. The Journal of Pain 2009;10:398-407.
157. Hsieh K, Scott HM, Murthy S. Associated risk f actors for depression and anxiety in adults with
intellectual and developmental disabilities: Five-year follow up. American journal on intellectual and
developmental disabilities 2020;125:49-63.
158. Määttä T, Kaski M, Taanila A, Keinänen-Kiukaa nniemi S, Iivanainen M. Sensory impairments and
health concerns related to the degree of intellectual disability in people with Down syndrome. Down Syndrome
Research and Practice 2006;11:78-83.
159. Maas S, Festen DAM, Hilgenkamp TIM, Oppewal A. The association between medication use and gait
in adults with intellectual disabilities. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research 2020;64:793-803.
160. Carfì A, Romano A, Zaccaria G, et al. The burden of chronic disease, multimorbidity, and
polypharmacy in adults with Down syndrome. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A 2020;182:1735-
43.
161. Deb S, Hare M, Prior L, Bhaumik S. Dementia scr eening questionnaire for individuals with intellectual
disabilities. The British Journal of Psychiatry 2007;190:440-4.
162. Pitetti KH, Climstein M, Mays MJ, Barrett PJ. Is okinetic arm and leg strength of adults with Down
syndrome: a comparative study. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation 1992;73:847-50.
163. Krebs EE, Lorenz KA, Bair MJ, et al. Development and initial validation of the PEG, a three-item scale
assessing pain intensity and interference. Journal of general internal medicine 2009;24:733-8.
164. Maenner MJ, Smith LE, Hong J, Makuch R, Greenberg  JS, Mailick MR. Evaluation of an activities of
daily living scale for adolescents and adults with developmental disabilities. Disability and Health Journal
2013;6:8-17.
165. Lamb SE, Jørstad-Stein Ec Fau - Hauer K, Hauer K Fau - Becker C, Becker C. Development of a
common outcome data set for fall injury prevention trials: the Prevention of Falls Network Europe consensus.
2005.
166. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzal ez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture
(REDCap)--A metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research
informatics support. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 2009;42:377-81.
167. Stroup WW, Milliken GA, Claassen EA, Wolfinger RD. SAS for mixed models. [electronic resource] :
introduction and basic applications: SAS; 2018.
168. Littell RC, Milliken GA, Stroup WW, Wolfinger RD , Schabenberger O. SAS for mixed models. Cary,
NC: SAS Institute Inc.; 2006.
169. Box GE, Cox DR. An analysis of transformations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B
(Methodological) 1964:211-52.
170. Milliken GA, Johnson DE, eds. Analysis of Messy Data. New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC; 2001.
171. Hochberg Y. A sharper Bonfe rroni procedure for multiple tests of significance. Biometrika
1988;75:800-2.
<<<PAGE 36>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
36
172. Holm S. A simple sequentially reje ctive multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics
1979;6:65-70.
173. Diggle P, Liang K-Y, Zeger SL. Analysis of Long itudinal Data. New York: Oxford University Press;
1994.
174. Laird NM, Ware JH. Random-effects models fo r longitudinal data. Biometrics 1982:963-74.
175. Xiong C, Zhu K, Yu K, Miller JP. Statistical modeling in biomedical research: Longitudinal data
analysis. Handbook of Statistics 2007;27:429-63.
176. Jacqmin ‐Gadda H, Commenges D, Dartigues JF. Random changepoint model for joint modeling of
cognitive decline and dementia. Biometrics 2006;62:254-60.
177. De Gruttola V, Tu XM. Modelli ng progression of CD4-lymphocyte count and its relationship to survival
time. Biometrics 1994:1003-14.
178. Andersen PK, Gill RD. Cox's regression model fo r counting processes: A large sample study. The
Annals of Statistics 1982:1100-20.
179. Prentice RL, Williams BJ, Peterson AV. On the regr ession analysis of multivariate failure time data.
Biometrika 1981;68:373-9.
180. Therneau TM, Grambsch PM. Modeling Survival Data: Extending the Cox Model: Springer Science &
Business Media; 2000.
181. Analysis of messy data. III ed2001.
182. Beekly DL, Ramos EM, Lee WW, et al. The Na tional Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC)
database: The uniform data set. Alzheimer Disease & Associated Disorders 2007;21:249-58.
183. Carrillo MC, Bain LJ, Frisoni GB, Weiner MW . Worldwide Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging
initiative. Alzheimer's & Dementia 2012;8:337-42.
184. Health NIoM. Human Subjects Research Pr otections Toolkit. In: (HSPU) HSPU, ed.2022.
Appendix A.
<<<PAGE 37>>>
CONFIDENTIAL: This document is the intellectual property of the research group.  Acceptance of this document constitutes the
agreement by the recipient that no unpublished information contained herein will be published or disclosed without prior written
37
Note: MacArthur Competency Assessment Tool for Clinical Research41 ; National Institute of Mental Health Human Subjects Protection
Unit (HSPU)184