<<<PAGE 1>>>
1
Decisions about Cancer Screening in Alzheimer’s Disease
(DECAD)
PROTOCOL
4.28.2022
BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIMS
The incidence of both Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (AD) and of breast cancer increases with
age; thus, many older women with AD are faced with questions about breast cancer screening. Having AD can
impact a women’s ability to participate in her medical decision-making about breast cancer screening. As a
result, AD family caregivers (hereafter referred to as caregivers) are frequently involved in making decisions
about mammography. Each year over 800,000 women with AD receive screening mammography. Caregivers
cite decision-making and procedures related to mammograms as particularly stressful and there is a lack of
data that mammography screening helps women with AD live longer or better.
The average life expectancy of older women with AD is <10 years. Current guidelines recommend not
screening women with a life expectancy of <10 years. The rationale is that these women will not live long
enough to experience the life prolonging benefits of mammography screening. Instead, screening these
women can put them at risk for physical and psychological harm as a result of over diagnosis, overtreatment,
additional tests due to false positives, and the identification of clinically unimportant cancer. Conversely, while
mammography screening may not help older women with AD live longer, it may help find breast cancers earlier
when they are easier to treat. Therefore, it is important that women with AD and their caregivers have
information to make an informed decision about screening. The goal of our project is to test if an evidence-
based decision aid for caregivers can improve the quality of decision-making about mammography in older
women with AD.
A decision aid for AD caregivers about mammography could improve the quality of medical decision-making,
by informing caregivers about the risks, benefits, and their choices. No decision aids exist to support AD
caregivers with decisions about mammography despite the frequency that caregivers are approached with this
decision. The DECAD Study will test if a decision aid can support AD caregivers and patients in making
decisions about breast cancer screening by improving markers of decision quality. The study aims are:
Primary Aim: To examine the effect of a mammography screening decision aid intervention for older
women with AD on markers of decision quality among caregivers.
Hypothesis: Caregivers of patients who receive the decision aid will have lower levels of decisional conflict
(primary outcome) and higher levels of decision-making self-efficacy (secondary outcome) about breast cancer
screening in older women with AD, compared to the control group.
Secondary Aim: To examine the effect of a mammography screening decision aid intervention for
caregivers on the utilization of mammograms in older women with AD.
Hypothesis: Women with AD who are randomized to receive the decision aid will receive less mammography
screening at 15 and 24 months after the intervention, compared to the control group.
Exploratory Aim: To identify the factors that are associated with impact of a decision aid intervention
on mammography screening cessation in older women with AD.
Exploratory Hypothesis: Among the dyads randomized to receive the decision aid, caregivers of patients with
more severe cognitive impairment, greater co-morbidities, or older age will experience a greater reduction in
frequency of mammograms in the 15 and 24 months following the intervention.
<<<PAGE 2>>>
2
METHODS
Study Design:
 Two arm, randomized controlled trial.
 426 AD patient-informal caregiver dyads with completed baselines. 213 dyads receive the decision aid
on mammography
(Appendix 1 and
Appendix 2) and 213
dyads to receive a control
condition in the form of a
two-page paper pamphlet
on home safety
developed by the
American Geriatrics
Society Foundation for
Health in Aging (Appendix
3).
Participants:
 Patients will be women,
age 75 and older with a
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
disease or related
dementia.
Table 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the DECAD Trial
INCLUSION CRITERIA
Patients Caregivers
Female and 75 years or older 18 years or older
At least one mammogram in the past five years Primary family caregiver of the patient*
Primary care visit scheduled in the next 12 months
Diagnosis of AD as determined by ICD-10 code Ability to provide informed consent
Ability to provide informed consent or assent
Ability to communicate in English Ability to communicate in English
EXCLUSION CRITERIA
Patients Caregivers
Permanent resident of a nursing facility Caregiver is a non-family member who is not
a legal Healthcare Power of Attorney
Had a mammogram in the past 6 months Less than a 7th grade education**
Primary care visit scheduled is not the first visit
with the PCP
Made a decision to stop getting mammograms Made a decision that the patient will stop
getting mammograms
History of Atypical Ductal Hyperplasia, lobular
carcinoma in situ, ductal carcinoma in situ, or
invasive breast cancer or other cancer in the past
5 years.
Has a diagnosis of AD or has a serious mental
illness such as bipolar or schizophrenia as
determined byICD-10 code
Has mild cognitive impairment, serious mental
illness such as bipolar or schizophrenia as
determined byICD-10 code
* Identified by the patient or listed as primary caregiver in EMR.
**The reading level of the decision aid is 7th grade.
Table 2. Sites for DECAD Recruitment*
Site Number of
sites
# of
Physician
s
Women
≥70
years
old with
AD
Race and Ethnicity
for population with
AD
Eskenazi Health
Aging Brain Care
Program
1
5
1,383
White 42%
African American 51%
Other or unknown 7%
Hispanic 2%
Indiana University
Alzheimer Disease
Center
1
NA
43
White 67.5%
African American
32.5%
Indiana University
Health Department of
Neurology
1 3 TBD TBD
Alzheimer’s
Association- Greater
Indiana Chapter
5-10 NA TBD TBD
IU Health PC
179
2,026
White 75.6%
African American
22.4%
<<<PAGE 3>>>
3
 Caregivers will be age 18 and
older and an unpaid, informal
caregiver for the patient either
self-identified, identified by the
patent, or identified by the
patient’s medical team.
 See Table 1 for patient and
caregiver inclusion and exclusion
criteria.
Recruitment Sites (as of 11/30/2021):
 Aging Brain Care Program at
Eskenazi Health
 Indiana University Alzheimer
Disease Center (research
registry)
 Indiana University Health Department of Neurology
 Indiana University Health Department of Psychiatry (Drs. Bateman and Wang)
 Alzheimer’s Association- Greater Indiana Chapter (Support Group members)
 Indiana University Health Primary Care Practices in central Indiana
 Eskenazi Health Primary Care Practices in central Indiana
 Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts
 Parkview Health, Fort Wayne, Indiana
 CICOA Aging and In-Home Services, central Indiana
 LifeStream Services, eastern Indiana
 Thrive Alliance, southern central Indiana
 SWIRCA & More, southwest Indiana
Primary outcome: Caregiver decisional conflict at post-index visit (T3)
Secondary outcome (caregiver): Caregiver decision-making self-efficacy at post-index visit (T3)
Secondary outcome (patient): Utilization of mammograms at 15 (T4) and 24 months post-index visit (T5).
Table 3. Measures
Outcomes Construct/Core
Attributes
Outcome
measure(s)
Name of
Measure
citation
Description Scoring When Source
Primary outcome Feel Informed
Values clarification
Decisional
Conflict
Decision
Conflict Scale
16-items on a 1-5 Likert
scale. Measures uncertainty
around a decision, whether
Scores
range 0-100;
Lower
T1
T3
Caregiver
reported
14 PC
practices
Other or unknown 2%
Hispanic 0.9%
BIDMC 7 sites 90  1600 White- 64%
Black- 23%
Asian- 4%
Hispanic -5%
Parkview Health TBD TBD TBD TBD
CICOA Aging and In-
Home Services
NA NA 988 TBD
LifeStream Services NA NA 200 TBD
Thrive Alliance  NA NA 40 TBD
SWIRCA & More NA NA 90 TBD
Total 34 277 6280
*Data as of March 2017 besides BIDMC, Parkview Health, CICOA, LifeStream, Thrive
Alliance, SWIRCA & More
<<<PAGE 4>>>
4
one feels informed, clear
about their personal values,
and supported in their
decision-making.
scores
indicate less
conflict.
Secondary
outcomes
Belief in  ability to
make and
participate in
shared decision
making
Decision-
making self-
efficacy
Decision Self-
Efficacy Scale
(DSE)
11-items on a 5-point Likert
scale. Measures of self-
confidence or belief in one’s
ability to make decisions
Low,
medium,
high
decision
self-
efficacy.
Scores
range 0-100
T1
T3
Caregiver
reported
Receipt of
screening
DECAD
Created
Review primary care notes,
radiology reports, and
documentation on
screening/preventive care;
caregiver report
Yes or no
determinatio
n
T4
T5
Pt EMR;
Caregiver
reported
Involvement in the
decision
Caregiver role
in decision-
making
Adapted from
the Control
Preferences
Scale
4-items to assess
preferences for and
involvement in making
decisions on their own or
sharing responsibility with
the pt or doctor.
Active vs.
passive/shar
ed with
doctor (since
aim of
decision aids
is to help
dyads be
more active
in decision-
making)
T3
Caregiver
reported
Patient role in
decision-
making
Adapted from
the Control
Preferences
Scale
2-items to assess
involvement in making
decisions on their own or
sharing responsibility with
their family or doctor.
Active vs.
passive/shar
ed with
doctor (since
aim of
decision aids
is to help
dyads be
more active
in decision-
making)
T3
Patient
reported
Other measures  Socio-
demographics
DECAD
Created
32 item questionnaire to
measure items such as
relationship to the patient,
frequency and type of
contact with the patient,
geographic distance from
the patient, education level,
annual income, self-
reported health status, etc.
Co-variates T1 Caregiver
reported
Does severity of the
patient’s cog and
functional
impairment impact
caregiver decision
making
Severity of
patient’s
cognitive
impairment
Dementia
Severity
Rating Scale
(DSRS)
12-item questionnaire for
caregivers to assess
severity of AD in 12 major
functional and cognitive
domains.
Score
ranges from
0 (mild) to
54 (severe).
T1 Caregiver
reported
Caregiver
Appraisal of
Function and
Upset (CAFU)
15-item questionnaire for
caregivers to measure
ADLs and iADLS
impairment and how much
those impairments upset or
burden the caregiver
T1 Caregiver
reported
Intention for
the patient to
be screened
DECAD
Created
3-items total. Two on a 5-
point scale to assess
propensity to get screened.
One to ask how many more
mammograms they think
the patient will get.
Yes vs.
those who
are unsure
vs. No
screening;
We will look
at the scores
continuously
and
categorize
scores as 1-
2(no), 3
(unsure), or
4-5 (yes).
T1
T3
Caregiver
and
Patient
reported
<<<PAGE 5>>>
5
Breast Cancer
and
Alzheimer’s
disease
Knowledge
DECAD
Created
16-items (6 multiple choice
and 10 true/false); 13 were
adapted from other studies
and 3 were developed
based on the decision aid.
Sum of
correct
answers
T1
T3
Caregiver
reported
Burden of
screening on
the patient
DECAD
Created
Review patient’s EMR for
additional diagnostic
procedures due to
mammogram follow-up;
false-positive results,
identification of an
abnormality on screening
exam but further work-up
declined, identification of a
clinically unimportant
cancer; documentation of
depressive symptoms,
anxiety, or pain related to
the experience of getting a
mammogram and not a
general measure to be
assessed independent of
that event
Yes or no
Characteriza
tion if yes
T4
T5
(quart
erly for
DSMB
)
Pt EMR
review;
Burden of
screening on
the caregiver
DECAD
Created
<<<SECTION 5 items on a 5-point Likert>>>
5 items on a 5-point Likert
scale. Assess perceptions
about the burden of
mammography for the
patient
&
Semi-structured questions
about patient’s
mammogram experience
and perceived burden of
screening.
Sum of
scores
T4 Caregiver
reported
Values, Attitudes,
Norms, and
Experiences
DECAD
created
15 items total. 5 items on a
10 point scale re: values; 3
items on a 7 point scale on
attitudes; and 3 items on a
5 point scale re; perceived
norms; and 4-itmes on a 5
point scale re: experience
with mammograms
descriptive T1
T3
Caregiver
and
Patient
reported
Health literacy  A 4-item health literacy
assessment with values of
0-5 based on possible
responses to each of the
questions.116
Higher
scores being
higher health
literacy.
T1 Caregiver
reported
Numeracy   A 3-item assessment of
numeracy skills
Higher
scores being
higher health
literacy.
T1 Caregiver
reported
Mammogram
discussion with the
Patient’s provider
8-items that assess if a
discussion about
mammograms took place
and the content of those
discussions.
Descriptive T3
Process measure  Acceptability
of the decision
aid
DECAD
Created
3-items on a yes/no scale
and 6-items on a 5-point
Likert scale to measure
caregivers’ and patients’
perceptions about the
length, clarity, helpfulness
and willingness to
recommend decision aid.
Also, the number of times
they reviewed it, how many
pages they read, how long
it took them to read it, how
they would prefer to receive
it if not part of a study.
Sum of
scores
T3 Patient
reported
Process measure  Acceptability
of the decision
aid
DECAD
Created
20-items on a 5-point Likert
scale and 8 yes/no
questions to measure
Sum of
scores
T3 Caregiver
reported
<<<PAGE 6>>>
6
caregivers’ and patients’
perceptions about the
length, clarity, helpfulness
and willingness to
recommend decision aid.
Also, the number of times
they reviewed it, how many
pages they read, how long
it took them to read it, how
they would prefer to receive
it if not part of a study.
Intervention Description and Timing of Measures
Although participants may be recruited from specialty memory care or AD clinics, the intervention will be
delivered in the patient’s primary care setting (e.g. the usual setting for discussions about mammography).
Step 1: Identification of Potential Participants
 Participants will be identified in a variety of ways and will be tailored based on the recruitment site.
Patients identified through a clinical site (ABC, IUH) will be identified via the Indiana Network for Patient
Care, which can access patient lists by doctors and clinic and PC clinic schedules. To identify potential
participants at BIDMC, a data manager at BIDMC will send a research assistant a list of all women 75-
89 years with dementia (based on ICD-10 codes [will be expansive and will include codes for memory
loss and all forms of dementia]) and without a history of breast cancer scheduled to see their primary
care provider (PCP, physician or nurse practitioner). With a HIPAA waiver a research assistant (RA) will
then review these patients' medical records to see if the patient meets eligibility criteria (e.g., diagnosis
of Alzheimer's or related dementia; mammogram in the past 5 years but not in the past 6 months, no
history of breast cancer listed in problem list).  Patients’ physicians will be notified first of their patient’s
potential eligibility and be asked if DECAD can approach the patient and their caregiver for
participation. Physicians are routinely given 2 weeks to review their patient list (per IU PBRN). At
BIDMC, physicians are routinely given 2 days to respond to an email requesting permission to contact
their patients. However, if the physician has an out-of-office response we give PCPs 2 days to respond
after they return. The email informing PCPs that we plan to contact their patients tells PCPs that if we
do not hear from them in 2 days then we will send their patients an informational letter about the study.
Once approved by physician, the patient and caregiver will get a letter informing them of the study and
that study personnel will be calling them in 1-2 weeks to provide more information. Participants
identified from non-clinical sites (eg. Alz Assoc) will receive information about the study from the Alz
Asso and from Trial Match. They will reach out to the study team directly or will provide permission to
be follow-up by the study team regarding recruitment. We will also present the study at community
events such as caregiver support groups and Alzheimer’s related events. Caregivers approached at
these events will have the opportunity to sign a contact list that includes their phone number, to hear
more information about our study. The study team will then reach out to those caregivers to assess
eligibility and confirm interest in participation. We will use our pre-approved brochure for these
caregivers.
 We will consider any woman age ≥75 years with a diagnosis of AD or related dementia who has
received a mammogram in the past 5 years (but not in the past 6 months) and who does not have a
history of breast cancer or documentation in her EMR that she has decided to stop mammography.
 We will approach the primary family caregiver/ informant for each eligible woman. Caregivers will be
eligible if they are a caregiver for the patient and intend to accompany the patient to their next primary
care visit.
 Rolling enrollment will take place over 36 months with an average monthly enrollment of 11-12 dyads.
<<<PAGE 7>>>
7
Step 2: Enrollment
 Following eligibility determination and the informed consent process (which includes HIPAA release
form), and baseline assessment the dyads will be randomly assigned in 1:1 ratio to one of two groups:
mammogram decision aid or home safety guide, stratified by site.
 Decision aid or home safety guide will be mailed to both the patient and the caregiver immediately after
randomization but at least 1 week before the index visit.
 Date of the patient’s next PCP visit will be obtained via caregiver report at the baseline interview and
via EMR review at the time of enrollment.
 For all dyads, the Research Assistant will meet them in person or by phone 0-2 days before the index
visit to standardize the process by which all dyads review the decision aid. The pre-index visit
assessment (T2) will occur in-person or by phone 30 minutes-2 days before the index visit either at the
patient’s house, at the caregiver’s house, at the provider office or at a location of the dyads choice.
Observational data only is collected at this assessment. The RAs will not discuss the content of the
decision aid at that time; they will simply ensure that they have read it or have had it read to them
before the index visit. We will record if the RA is asked to read the DA to either member of the dyad. If
Figure 1.
<<<PAGE 8>>>
8
the dyad has any questions about the content of the decision aid, the RA will encourage them to ask
the patient’s provider any questions. The phone option script will provide prompts to ensure review of
the decision aid during the phone conversation
 If the date of the patient’s index visit is not known or not documented in the EMR, the RA will follow the
study tracking process to obtain the patient’s index visit appointment date. This includes a 2x per month
phone call to the caregiver and EMR review (if accessible).
 If the index PCP visit does not occur within approximately six months of the baseline, another provider
visit may be substituted with PI permission.
 The post- index visit (T3) will occur in-person or via phone 0-5 days after the index visit.
 The 15 month follow-up (T4) will be in-person or via phone and include an assessment with the
caregiver and a review of the patient’s EMR. This interview may be audio recorded.  In the event we
have exhausted the attempts to reach the participant/caregiver by phone or in person, we will send a
paper copy of a letter explaining the request to have them complete the survey on paper and return to
the research assistant.
 The 24 month follow-up (T5) will include a review of the patient’s EMR (only).
 See Table 3 and Figure 1 for a complete list of measures and timing of collection.
Statistical Plan:
Step 1: Overview
 For analysis, we will examine univariate distributions of continuous variables in order to detect any
potential violations of assumptions to our planned parametric methods of analyses.
 We will transform variables as needed to ensure normal distribution assumptions are met.
 We will use nonparametric methods if transformations are inadequate.
 Demographic characteristics of the patients and caregivers will be compared between the two groups in
order to evaluate if randomization is effectively balanced. We will include caregiver sex as a moderating
biological variable and examine the influence of sex on caregivers’ decisional conflict and other factors
associated with the impact of our decision aid interaction on mammography screening use.
 We will use Chi-squared tests or Fisher’s exact tests to compare the frequencies of categorical
variables. Analysis of variance (ANOVA), or its nonparametric alternative, the Wilcoxon rank sum test,
will be used to compare the distribution of continuous variables between the groups.
 We will use SAS 9.4 for all analyses (SAS Institute, Carey, NC).
Step 2: Primary Aim
 Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) models will be used to compare mean Decisional Conflict Scale
(DCS) scores between the intervention and control groups. For each caregiver, the difference in DCS
scores from baseline to follow-up will be used as the dependent variable in the ANCOVA with
randomization group assignment as the independent variable adjusting for the stratification variable of
recruitment site and for other potential baseline covariates that are found to be significantly different
between the two groups in univariate comparisons.
<<<PAGE 9>>>
9
 ANCOVA models will also be used to compare secondary decision quality outcome (e.g., decision-
making self-efficacy) at follow-up between the intervention and control groups adjusting for site and
other potential baseline covariates found to be significantly different between the two groups in
univariate comparisons.
Step 3: Secondary Aim
 A binary indicator variable for receipt of mammograms within 15 months and within 24 months from the
intervention date will be used as a secondary outcome variable.
 A logistic model with group (decision aid or control) as the independent variable will be used adjusting
for recruitment sites (e.g., EH, IUH and IADC) and other potential baseline covariates found to be
different in univariate comparisons.
Step 4: Exploratory Aim
 Once we have tested our hypothesis for the main effects, we will also perform hypothesis-generating
exploratory analyses to examine effects in sub-groups of patients and caregivers.
 Hypothesized sub-group analyses will be used for both the primary and secondary outcomes
examining the moderating effect of patients’ and caregivers’ characteristics on decision aid impact.
 The following patient variables will be included in sub-group analyses: age, level of cognitive
impairment, number of co-morbidities, and their role in mammography decisions.
 The following caregiver variables will be included in sub-group analyses: relationship to the patient,
level of education, health literacy, and perceived burden of mammography for the patient and for them.
 We will include each of these variables in the ANCOVA models for the primary outcome, in the logistic
models for the secondary outcome and test for interactions between these variables and intervention
group adjusting for recruitment sites and other potential baseline covariates. Significant interaction
between a patient/caregiver characteristic variable and group would indicate different intervention
effects in the dyad subgroups defined by the variable.
Step 5: Sensitivity analyses for the impact of refusals and other sources of missing data
 We will compare patient/caregiver characteristics between those who complete the follow-up
assessments and those who did not. Significant variables detected from these comparisons will be
included in the ANCOVA models as covariates to control for potential bias from missing data.
Sensitivity analyses for the impact of refusals and other sources of missing data: Given the short time
frame for collecting decision quality measures at follow-up and our pilot data, we anticipate few missing data
due to caregiver refusal for the primary and main secondary outcomes. We will compare patient/caregiver
characteristics between those who complete the follow-up assessments and those who did not. Significant
variables detected from these comparisons will be included in the ANCOVA models as covariates to control for
potential bias from missing data. Since the secondary outcome of receipt of mammogram screening will be
collected from the EMR, missing data would arise only in cases of patient’s death or moving out of state. We
anticipate minimum missing data on the analysis of the receipt of mammogram screening.
<<<PAGE 10>>>
10
STATISTICAL POWER
Sample size for the proposed trial is calculated using our pilot data that showed effect sizes of 0.28 on
Decision Conflict Scale (DCS) score and 0.34 for self-efficacy scores. To detect effect size of 0.28 or greater
on DCS scores between the two groups, we will need to have 202 patient/caregiver dyads per group to
complete both baseline and follow-up with 80.2% power using two sample t-test at 0.05 level. Allowing 5%
missing data at follow-up, we will need to enroll 213 patient/caregiver dyads per group (total 426 dyad
baselines). With our planned sample size, we will have 92.6% to detect effect size of 0.34 or greater on
changes in self-efficacy scores between the two groups.
The pilot showed the mean DCS were similar between the two groups, the control group had a large SD which
should come down with large sample size. Table 4.
Table 4. Baseline DCS scores
Group N Mean Std Dev Std Err Minimum Maximum
Control 8 26.8375 22.6769 8.0175 0 69.0000
Decision support 9 26.4444 16.4249 5.4750 0 45.0000
Change in DCS from baseline to follow-up: DA group had greater decrease in DCS than controls. The current
effect size is about 0.55. Table 5.
Table 5. Change in DCS scores from baseline to follow-up, by group
Group N Mean Std Dev Std Err Minimum Maximum
Control 8 5.2000 8.8073 3.1139 -6.0000 21.0000
Decision support 9 9.7778 7.8705 2.6235 0 20.0000
Diff (1-2)   -4.5778 8.3208 4.0432
TIMELINE
Table 6. Timeline
Oct 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 April 2022
Q
1
Q
2
Q
3
Q
4
Q
1
Q
2
Q
3
Q
4
Q
1
Q
2
Q
3
Q
4
Q
1
Q
2
Q
3
Q
4
Q
1
Q
2
Q
3
Q
4
Q
1
Q
2
Q
3
Q
4
Study Preparation: IRB Modification, hire/train staff
Recruitment: open new sites, organize by wave per
site
Data collection: Enrollment & Baseline assessment
Follow-up assessments
Convene DSMB
Data analysis
Prepare abstracts and manuscripts
Disseminate results
ADVERSE EVENTS REPORTING
The DECAD study has a NIA approved Data Safety Monitoring Plan and a Data Safety Monitoring Board (See
the DSMP and DSMB Charter attached).  In summary:
The PI will comply with Indiana University IRB and the NIA guidelines for defining, collecting, and reporting
serious adverse events, adverse events, and unanticipated problems.
<<<PAGE 11>>>
11
Definitions-This study involves reviewing a paper-based decision aid regarding mammograms and answering
questions and does not involve the administration of a medication or medical procedure.  While an adverse
event is unlikely, it is possible that a subject in this study may experience an adverse event. In our study, a
serious adverse event is defined as the following: (1) death; (2) a life-threatening episode requiring immediate
intervention; (3) an inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization; (4) a persistent or
significant incapacitation or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions; (5) an episode
that requires intervention to prevent the above and/or permanent impairment or damage.
Non-serious adverse events are “any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a subject, including any
abnormal sign (e.g., abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated
with the subject’s participation in the research” that do not meet the definition for serious adverse event.
Unanticipated problems are defined as any incident, experience, or outcome that is unexpected, in terms of
nature, severity, or frequency and that may be related or possibly related to the research procedures, or
suggests that, as a result of the problem, participants may be at higher risk than previously known or
recognized.
Collecting- All adverse events, unanticipated problems and potential risks will be monitored and collected
ongoing and throughout the study by the DECAD research assistants and research manager. Monitoring
events related to an increased risk that a malignancy of the breast may go undetected or any complications,
distress, or pain that arise from receiving a mammogram or as a result of follow-up procedures after a
mammogram will be will be done via electronic medical record reviews of study patients’ primary care
encounter notes, radiology reports, and other documentation on screening/preventive care for breast cancer
and from caregiver reports. Events related to any patient and caregiver loss of privacy or confidentiality or
fatigue, frustration or distress related to completing the intervention or the outcome questionnaires will be
assessed by the research manager via monitoring of the delivery of the study protocols and procedures and by
patient and caregiver reports.
For all participants, adverse events will be collected starting at enrollment and continue until after the
participant has completed the study. If an adverse event occurs, it will be documented on the NIA adverse
event and serious adverse event forms found at https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/dgcg/clinical-research-study-
investigators-toolbox/adverse-events. Unanticipated problems, that do not meet the definition of an adverse
event, will be documented in a DECAD study log that will be stored in a secure electronic folder behind the IU
fire wall. Details in the log may include participant study ID, date that the problem was reported or discovered
by the study, a description of the problem, and a corrective plan and measures to prevent reoccurrence.
Measurement and Reporting of Adverse Events- Adverse events associated with reviewing a paper-based
decision aid on mammography are infrequent. Therefore, adverse event rates are expected to vary little
between the treatment and control groups. Adverse events will be monitored by the research manager on an
ongoing basis. All adverse events and unanticipated problems will be reported to the study PI within 24 hours.
We plan to present unblinded adverse events data to the DSMB when requested and at scheduled meetings.
The NIA adverse event form will be used by the study staff to report all adverse events caused by the
intervention.
In the case of a participant death, the NIA Program Official, the IU IRB and the DSMB Chair will be notified
within 24 hours using NIA standardized forms for reporting serious adverse events (noted above). If
unanticipated, serious adverse events occur (i.e., not listed in the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan) and that
are related to the intervention, they will be reported to NIA Program Official, the IU IRB, and to the DSMB Chair
within 48 hours of study’s knowledge of the event using NIA standardized forms for reporting serious adverse
events. In cases where there is any question regarding the level of an adverse event or attributable cause, or
areas of uncertainty, the DECAD Study Team will consult with the DSMB and IU IRB. Further details are
provided in the DECAD DSMB charter. The summary of all other adverse events and unanticipated problems
should be reported to NIA Program Official and to the DSMB quarterly, unless otherwise requested by the
DSMB.
<<<PAGE 12>>>
12