<<<PAGE 1>>>
pg. 1
Protocol Title: Pilot, single center, open, trial of
rifaximin in probable Alzheimer’s Disease
NCT Number: NCT03856359
Date: September 6, 2019
<<<PAGE 2>>>
pg. 2
Synopsis
Title: Pilot, single center, open, trial of rifaximin in probable
Alzheimer’s Disease” version date Sept. 6, 2019
Study Description: Pilot trial to examine the relationship between rifaximin
therapy and change in cognition, serum neuronal markers,
ammonia levels and gut microbiota in patients with mild to
moderate Probable Alzheimer’s Disease.
Objectives: Primary Objective:  To test if rifaximin treatment in
subjects with AD is correlated with improvement in the
ADAS-Cog.
Secondary Objective: To test if rifaximin treatment is
associated with changes in serum amyloid-beta 42, total-
tau, Neurofilament light protein markers, serum pro-
inflammatory markers, ammonia levels and gut microbiota
in AD subjects.
Endpoints:   Primary Endpoints:
Cognitive domain – Alzheimer’s Disease
Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog)
Endpoints:   Primary Safety Endpoints will be Adverse Events
Secondary Endpoints:
Serum neuronal markers:
Neurofilament light (NF-L)
Total Tau
Amyloid-beta 42
Serum pro-inflammatory markers:
Interleukin (IL) 1 beta
IL 2
IL 4
IL 5
IL 6
IL 8
IL 10
IL 13
Tumor necrosis factor – alpha
Gut microbiota
Serum Ammonia
Study Population:  Mild to moderate severity of Probable Alzheimer’s Disease
<<<PAGE 3>>>
pg. 3
Phase:    Pilot trial - 2a
Description of    Single Site.  Duke University Health System and affiliated
senior care facilities
Sites/Facilities Enrolling
Participants:
Description of Study  Subjects will be treated with rifaximin (Xifaxan,
Intervention:   Salix Pharmaceuticals, Bridgewater, NJ) 550 mg
Orally twice a day for 12 weeks
Study Duration:  Up to 24 months (for recruitment, treatment, data
analyses)
Participant Duration:  3 months treatment plus 2 month follow up
Introduction
There is an urgent need to develop novel therapies for Alzheimer's disease (AD). 10% of
persons over age 65 and up to 50% over age 85 have dementia, with over 30 million
people affected worldwide. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has
approved cholinesterase inhibitors (Aricept, Exelon, Razadyne), memantine (Namenda),
and a drug combining a cholinesterase inhibitor and memantine (Namzaric) to treat the
cognitive symptoms of AD. These medications cannot cure AD or stop it from
progressing.
There has been much speculation for decades regarding the cause of Alzheimer’s
Disease. Two of the many theories are the focus of our research study. The first theory
posits that toxic brain concentrations of ammonia play a role in the AD pathophysiology
(Seiler, 1993). There have, however, been no published trials of using ammonia lowering
medications for the treatment of AD. The second and more recent theory proposes that
there is a symbiotic relationship between gut microbiota and brain homeostasis and
that this relationship is disrupted in patients with AD, possibly due to an imbalance in
the ratio of pro-inflammatory / anti-inflammatory gut microbiota (De-Paula et al, 2018,
Cattaneo et al, 2017).
Background
<<<PAGE 4>>>
pg. 4
Rifaximin is a virtually non-absorbed antibiotic with the unique properties of lowering
blood ammonia levels and altering gut flora. We hypothesize that Rifaximin will improve
cognition and function in AD patients by lowering blood ammonia and / or lowering
circulatory pro-inflammatory cytokines secreted by harmful gut bacteria.
We will be measuring blood ammonia levels and pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory compounds in the blood and analyzing gut microbiota in patients with AD
before and after 3 months of Rifaximin therapy. If patients exhibit measurable
improvement in cognition and function, we will analyze our data to see if their
improvement correlates with a lower blood ammonia level and / or a shift towards anti-
inflammatory species in the gut and a similar shift in the blood cytokine panel to
favoring anti-inflammatory compounds.
Evidence supporting our hypothesis for this study is presented below.
Ammonia Neurotoxicity
Ammonia is a substrate as well as a product of 16 different enzymatic reactions in the
brain. In the healthy brain, ammonia homeostasis is maintained by its combining with
glutamate to form non-toxic glutamine via the glutamine synthetase pathway.
In the disease state, high brain ammonia levels adversely affect membrane potential,
mitochondrial function, astrocyte morphology, energy metabolism, mRNA and protein
expression, brain pH, calcium signaling and other cellular functions in the brain (Bosoi et
al, 2009).
The possibility that ammonia is at least partly responsible for the pathologic changes
seen in the AD brain was first proposed by Seiler in 1993, when he noted that some of
the changes in the AD brain can also be seen in the brains of hyperammonemic patients
(Seiler, 1993). The clinical presentation of a patient with high ammonia levels caused by
congenital portal systemic shunting or an inborn error of metabolism may in fact mimic
that of dementia (Miyata et al, 2009). Brain PET CT using 13N ammonia showed high
brain 13N levels, trapped in glutamine, in the brain of patients with hepatic
encephalopathy, correlating with high peripheral arterial blood ammonia levels (Keiding
et al, 2005).
Ammonia as a causative factor of AD can be difficult to prove; ammonia levels cannot be
quantified at autopsy because of rapid post mortem formation of ammonia. However,
in-vivo studies have shown evidence of elevated ammonia levels in the AD brain.
Arteriovenous sampling in early stage normoammonemic AD patients demonstrated a
net release of ammonia (-25.6 micrograms / 100 g x min) from the brain compared to
<<<PAGE 5>>>
pg. 5
net uptake of ammonia (+7.2 micrograms / 100 g x min) by the brain of young control
subjects, pointing toward an endogenous source for the ammonia (Hoyer et al, 1990).
This efflux of ammonia from the AD brain is most likely due to low levels of glutamine
synthetase found in the AD brain (LePrince et al, 1995), causing high levels of this
endogenous ammonia to build up in the extracellular fluid and diffuse across the blood
brain barrier into the venous effluent. Low glutamine synthetase levels have been found
to correlate with increased density of amyloid deposits in the AD brain (Le Prince et al,
1995).
The brain also receives exogenous ammonia, of which the gut is a major source. Fecal
bacteria produce ammonia by fermenting protein. The aging colon contains a greater
percentage of protein fermenting bacteria than is seen in the colon of younger patients
(Woodmansey, 2007, Andrieux et al, 2002). The aging colon also has a longer fecal dwell
time than that of younger patients, allowing higher levels of ammonia to build up before
fecal evacuation (Woodmansey, 2007, Andrieux et al, 2002). Gut ammonia is absorbed
into the portal venous system and detoxified in the liver to form uric acid, which is then
excreted in the kidneys. The uric acid cycle of the aging liver is less efficient at
detoxifying ammonia (Marchesini, 1990) allowing higher levels of ammonia to reach the
systemic circulation. One study reported significantly elevated post prandial blood
ammonia levels in AD patients when compared with age-matched controls (Fisman et al,
1985).
The blood brain barrier plays an important role in regulating brain ammonia metabolism
(Hawkins, 2009). 20-50% of blood ammonia passes the blood brain barrier and is
converted into glutamine. Glutamine and glutamate are pumped from the extracellular
fluid into the endothelial cells, where glutamine is partially metabolized to ammonia and
glutamate. Glutamine and ammonia then diffuse into the blood.
Breakdown of the blood brain barrier in the aging patient begins in the hippocampus,
the area critical for learning and memory, and this may contribute to cognitive decline
(Erdo et al, 2017). Gadolinium enhanced Brain MRI has shown that the blood brain
barrier is more permeable in the aging patient when compared with younger patients
(Montagne et al 2015). The blood brain barrier in the AD patient is also more permeable
than that of non-cognitively-impaired age matched controls (Montagne et al, 2015).
High concentrations of Gadolinium are first seen in the hippocampus, the site
responsible for memory and learning, both of which are clinically impaired in AD
patients.
One theory is that the  blood brain barrier allows greater amounts of ammonia into the
AD brain, triggering or worsening pre-existent changes.
This study aims to lower blood and brain ammonia levels in AD patients by targeting the
colon. This will be accomplished by administering a virtually non-systemically absorbed
antibiotic, rifaximin, which is FDA approved for hepatic encephalopathy.  Rifaximin
<<<PAGE 6>>>
pg. 6
lowers blood ammonia by altering fecal flora by blocking bacterial RNA synthesis and
also by increasing small bowel glutaminase (Garcovich et al, 2012, Kang et al, 2016).
Gut Microbiota Dysbiosis
The gut harbors 95% of the total human microbiome and is made up of more than 5,000
taxa. A diverse and stable gut microbiota promotes health in humans. Gut species
remain relatively constant throughout adulthood until the seventh decade, when it
becomes less diverse, harboring higher numbers of Proteobacteria and lower numbers
of Bifidobacteria. This change most likely accounts for chronic inflammatory disorders
seen in the elderly. An imbalance in the gut bacterial species can weaken the intestinal
barrier and create system wide inflammation via gut lymphoid tissue which comprises
70% - 80% of the immune system. Blood brain barrier permeability is also altered. The
gut bacteria secrete pro-inflammatory compounds and neuroactive molecules that
include serotonin, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), catecholamines and acetylcholine
which cross the blood brain barrier and cause brain inflammation and brain dysfunction.
(Sochocka et al).
A growing number of pro-inflammatory compounds secreted by gut bacteria and seen in
patients with AD are being discovered. These include interleukin (IL) – 6, tumor necrosis
– alpha and the inflammasome complex (NLRP3). A recent study revealed higher
numbers of Escherichia and Shigella in the gut of amyloid positive AD patients when
compared with healthy controls and this correlated with higher levels of circulating pro-
inflammatory cytokines. The AD patients also had lower numbers of gut Eubacterium
rectale and this correlated with lower levels of circulating anti-inflammatory compounds
than seen in controls. (Cattaneo et al). Other researchers found that a preponderance of
gut Bacteroides and Blautia and reduced numbers of SMB53 and Dialister correlated
with elevated levels of brain amyloid CSF biomarkers (Vogte NM et al, 2017).
Interestingly, Clostridium tyrobutyricum and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, have been
shown to actually increase the integrity of the blood brain barrier by enhancing
expression of tight junction proteins and helping to maintain brain homeostasis.
(Braniste et al 2014).
Recent evidence also points to a possibly more direct influence of gut bacteria on the
brain. Terminal branches of the vagus nerve travel in close proximity to the intestinal
barrier. Neurotransmitters and neuropeptides secreted by bacteria in the gut have been
shown to activate vagal nerve ascending fibers, influencing brain function in mice. These
effects ceased after vagotomy was performed. (Holzer et al 2014, Bravo et al, 2011)
<<<PAGE 7>>>
pg. 7
Risk/Benefit Assessment
Known Risks
Risks of taking rifaximin, as listed on the package insert, are as follows.
Rifaximin is contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity to rifaximin or rifamycin
antimicrobials. Hypersensitivity reactions include exfoliative dermatitis, angioneurotic
edema, and anaphylaxis. Clostridium difficile associated diarrhea is a risk whenever a
patient is maintained chronically on antibiotics, with complications ranging from mild
diarrhea to fatal colitis. Drug resistant bacteria can also result from long term use. There
is increased systemic exposure to rifaximin in patients with severe hepatic impairment
or in patients who are taking P-glycoprotein inhibitors concomitantly. Regarding use in
geriatric patients, there were no reported overall differences in the safety of the drug
when used in patients 65 years of age or over, when compared with younger subjects.
The most common reactions seen in patients taking rifaximin are:
Peripheral edema
Nausea
Dizziness
Fatigue
Ascites
Muscle spasms
Pruritis
Abdominal pain
Anemia
Depression
Nasopharyngitis
Arthralgia
Dyspnea
Pyrexia
Rash
Potential Benefits
Possible benefits that the subject may receive include the benefits of free
medical testing and memory evaluations received at screening and during the
study.  Rifaximin is being used investigationally in this trial and hence it is not known if
there will be any cognitive benefits.  However, if there is ammonia toxicity in AD and the
<<<PAGE 8>>>
pg. 8
drug were to be effective in lowering ammonia, then the subject may experience
improvements in cognition.
Assessment of Potential Risks and Benefits
The available information suggests that the present clinical study has an acceptable risk-
benefit ratio.
Regarding the risk of C. difficile Infectious Diarrhea, two large randomized Control Trials
reported a 0.7% and 1.5% incidence of patients with hepatic encephalopathy taking
rifaximin for 6 months.  In those trials, all affected patients were at increased risk for
developing C. diff because of either previous lengthy hospitalizations or long courses of
antibiotics. (Bass  et al, 2010, Mullen et al, 2014) suggesting the risk will be lower in
healthy subjects with no such risk factors.
The safety monitoring practices employed by this protocol are adequate to protect the
subjects' safety and  detect  expected emergent adverse effects. The approximate
volume of blood (120 mL) planned for collection from each subject over the course of
the entire study (not including rechecks or extra tests ordered by the PI) presents no
undue risks to the subjects.
Objectives and Endpoints
OBJECTIVES ENDPOINTS JUSTIFICATION FOR
ENDPOINTS
Primary
ADAS-Cog is a widely
used cognitive endpoint in
AD clinical trials and
changes on this scale are
considered clinically
meaningful
Secondary
Serum neuronal markers:
Neurofilament light (NF-L)
Neurofilament light (NF-
L) is a 68 kDa cytoskeletal
intermediate filament
<<<PAGE 9>>>
pg. 9
OBJECTIVES ENDPOINTS JUSTIFICATION FOR
ENDPOINTS
Total Tau
Amyloid-beta 42
Serum pro-inflammatory
markers:
Interleukin (IL) 1 beta
IL 2
IL 4, IL 5
IL 6
IL 8
IL 10
IL 13
IL 17
Gut microbiota
protein that is expressed in
neurons (Mattson et al,
2017, Rissin et al, 2010).
Neurofilaments can be
released in significant
quantity following axonal
damage or neuronal
degeneration. NF-L has
been shown to associate
with traumatic brain
injury, multiple sclerosis,
frontotemporal dementia
and other
neurodegenerative
diseases. The Simoa NF-
light® assay (2) is a digital
immunoassay for the
quantitative determination
of   NF-L in serum and
plasma. This ultrasensitive
assay provides an
analytical sensitivity of
<<<SECTION 0.6 pg/mL (10-fold greater>>>
0.6 pg/mL (10-fold greater
than the 78.0 pg/mL for
the standard ELISA).
Plasma NFL also
correlates closely with
CSF concentrations.
Tau is a microtubule-
stabilizing protein
primarily localized in
central nervous system
neurons, but is also
expressed at low levels in
astrocytes and
oligodendrocytes (Dage et
al, 2016). Potential
movement of elevated
CSF tau across the blood-
brain barrier presents a
possibility that
measurements of tau in
blood could provide a
<<<PAGE 10>>>
pg. 10
OBJECTIVES ENDPOINTS JUSTIFICATION FOR
ENDPOINTS
convenient peripheral
window into brain/CSF
status. Recent reports
using digital immunoassay
technology have shown
elevation in peripheral tau
associated with hypoxic
brain injury, concussed
hockey players, and
repetitive minimal head
injury. The Simoa™
Human Total Tau assay
uses a combination of
monoclonal antibodies
that react with both
normal and
phosphorylated tau. The
assay recognizes all tau
isoforms.
Amyloid beta 42 is a 42
amino acid proteolytic
product from the amyloid
precursor protein that has
gained considerable
attention as a biomarker
correlating with cognitive
disorders (Janelidze et al,
2016). Amyloid beta (Aβ)
peptides (including the
shorter Aβ38 and Aβ40
isoforms) are produced by
many cell types in the
body but the expression is
particularly high in the
brain. Accumulation of
Aβ occurs in aging and
and in the
neurodegenerative
process. Concentrations of
Aβ42 in blood are much
lower than in
cerebrospinal fluid,
(typically single pg/mL
<<<PAGE 11>>>
pg. 11
OBJECTIVES ENDPOINTS JUSTIFICATION FOR
ENDPOINTS
Blood Ammonia
range), requiring very high
analytical sensitivity.
Serum pro-inflammatory
molecules have been
associated with
Alzheimer’s Disease
pathology. (Cattaneo et al,
2017)
An imbalance in the
number of pro-
inflammatory (e.g.
Shigella, Escherichia) and
anti-inflammatory
(Eubacterium rectale)
species in the gut may be
responsible for an
increase in the presence
of circulating
inflammatory markers
(Cattaneo et al, 2017).
High ammonia levels in
the brain may be
responsible for
pathological changes seen
in AD.
Secondary
Safety and tolerability Monitored via interviews,
clinic visits, and interim
phone calls. AEs and
SAEs will be tabulated.
Patients with AEs will be
reported as per IRB and
FDA guidelines.
Study Design
<<<PAGE 12>>>
pg. 12
Overall Design
We hypothesize that treatment with rifaximin will improve cognition and will change
serum neuronal markers.
This is an open label pilot study in which we will consent up to 25 subjects in order to
treat 10 eligible subjects with probable mild to moderate AD. The study is single site
and non-randomized. The subjects will be given rifaximin 550 mg orally twice daily for 3
months after evaluation to ensure they have no contraindications.  Subjects at risk for
drug interactions or tolerability issues may be started and/or maintained on a lower
dose of 550 mg once a day. Individuals on concomitant drugs which are contraindicated per
the package insert or in the investigators judgment will be excluded.  Individuals on concomitant
drugs which are not contraindicated but known to elevate blood levels SIGNIFICANTLY OR
THOSE WITH MILD AEs (E.G. MILD DIARHEA) WILL receive qd dosing BASED ON CLINICIAN
JUDGMENT. Consent, demographics, history, list of current medications, clinical and
safety assessments, MMSE and blood tests (CBC, CMP, TSH, B-12 and Folic acid) will be
performed at the Screening Visit. Medical history, physical exam, serum neuronal
biomarkers and cytokines, serum ammonia level, Adverse Events and cognitive testing
(ADAS-Cog-11) will be performed at the Baseline Visit. A stool sample collection kit will
also be given to the subject and caregiver at the Baseline Visit, with instructions for use
and how to get the sample back to the research coordinator. The stool sample will be
obtained prior the subject taking the study drug. Medical history, physical exam, serum
neuronal biomarkers and cytokines, serum ammonia level, Adverse Events and cognitive
testing (ADAS-Cog-11) will be performed at the 3 month endpoint visit.  A stool sample
collection kit will also be given to the subject and caregiver at the baseline visit and 3
month Visit with instructions for use and how to get the sample back to the research
coordinator.  Interim safety checks will occur via phone calls one week after baseline
and then every 2 weeks until the 3 month visit, which will then be followed by a 5
month phone call.  Caregivers will be instructed to call the research coordinator or
the PI (Dr. Suhocki after business hours or on weekends) if any change in stool is
noticed at any time during the study.  Unscheduled visit/labs may occur if warranted
for safety based on clinical judgment. Because of a small risk of developing C. difficile up
to 2 months following the last administration of rifaximin, the subjects will be followed
for an additional 2 months after the 3 month treatment ends.  Subjects who terminate
early will receive the 3 month assessment at the time of termination.
Scientific Rationale for Study Design
This is an open label pilot study designed to provide preliminary evidence on the clinical
efficacy of rifaximin in improving cognition in AD patients. We will be looking for
improvement in test scores, changes in serum levels of neuronal markers and cytokines
and changes in gut microbiota following treatment. We will also be collecting data
<<<PAGE 13>>>
pg. 13
regarding the safety of long-term use of this non-absorbed antibiotic for this disease.
This pilot may form the basis for a future larger randomized, double blind controlled
study to further test this hypothesis.  Statistical analyses will combined subjects on QD and
BID for analyses as this is a pilot study and both doses may impact gut flora.  In posthoc analyses
we will put dosing as a covariate to examine dose effects.
Justification for Dose and Study Population
The rifaximin dosage and route of administration are the same as that used to treat
hepatic encephalopathy, for which the drug and dosage are FDA approved. The dose will
remain the same throughout the 3 month study of rifaximin administration unless
stopped for safety reasons. The dose can be stopped or temporarily reduced for safety
or tolerability reasons based on clinical judgment. The age and study sample of mild to
moderate probable AD is similar to that used in AD prior trials.  We will select our
sample to be medically stable and free of hepatic disease and not having had recent
antibiotic therapy to minimize risk for C Difficile infection.
End of Study Definition
The end of the study will occur 5 months after baseline testing and first administration
of the drug. While drug administration will conclude and endpoint testing will be done
at 3 months, we will continue to follow each subject for an additional 2 months, as C.
difficile infectious diarrhea can occur up until 2 months after stopping an antibiotic.
Study Population
Inclusion Criteria
Subjects who meet the following criteria will be considered eligible to participate in the
clinical study:
Probable Alzheimer’s disease (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
(NINDS) criteria), mild to moderate severity
Ages 55-85; both genders
Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores 10-22
Willing and able to comply with all scheduled clinic visits.
Stable medical health
Has a family or professional caregiver who has regular contact with subject
Ability to consent or legal guardian who can consent
Living at home or in a facility
On no AD therapies or on stable (2 months) concurrent AD therapies
Exclusion Criteria
<<<PAGE 14>>>
pg. 14
Subjects who meet one or more of the following criteria will not be considered eligible
to participate in the clinical study:
Past history of C diff infection
Individuals on concomitant drugs which are contraindicated per the package insert or in the
investigators judgment will be excluded
Assessment, laboratory examination, physical examination or any other medical
condition or   circumstance making the volunteer unsuitable for participation in the
study in the judgment of the study clinicians
Allergy to Rifaximin
Antibiotic use  in the last 6 months
Hospitalization in the last 6 months
Are taking medications that interact with Rifaximin
Are taking Cyclosporine
Past or current history of bloody stools or C Diff infection
Elevated LFTs
Clinically significant abnormal hepatic or renal function
Uncorrected thyroid or B12 abnormalities
Participation in another investigational drug trial in the past 30 days
History of febrile illness within 5 days prior to the study period
Hyperammonemia caused by:
Valproic acid
Chemotherapy
Lung transplant
Bariatric surgery
Ureterosigmoidoscopy
Hyperalimentation
Urinary tract infection
Errors of metabolism
Urea cycle
Enzyme deficiencies
Organic acidemias
Fatty acid oxidation
Amino acid transport defects
Lifestyle Considerations
Participation in the study will not have any impact on subject lifestyle.
Screen Failures
<<<PAGE 15>>>
pg. 15
Volunteers who are consented to participate in the clinical trial and who do not meet
one or more criteria required for participation in the trial during the screening
procedures will not be rescreened later.
Strategies for Recruitment and Retention
Subjects will be recruited from referrals and the community via advertisement.
The study will be posted on clinicaltrials.gov.
Subjects and caregivers will be compensated for participation in the study at $50 each
per clinic visit to cover travel and time.
All tests and drug will be provided at no cost.
We expect to recruit 1 subject per month.
Study Intervention
Study Intervention Description
Rifaximin (Xifaxan, Salix Pharmaceuticals, Bridgewater, N.J.) (See Package Insert) is a
drug that is approved by the FDA for use in humans for the treatment of Hepatic
Encephalopathy, Traveler's Diarrhea and Irritable Bowel Syndrome. It is commercially
available. It will be used in accordance with approved labeling as pertains to dosage and
administration for Hepatic Encephalopathy, contraindications and warnings. However, it
will be used investigationally in this trial as rifaximin is not FDA approved for the
treatment of Alzheimer's Disease.
Safety, Adverse Effects reporting and Management
The AE monitoring schedule is described in the protocol.  The drug will be discontinued
immediately if there are emergent signs of C.Difficile (e.g.  patient has watery diarrhea
for longer than 24 hours,  fever, abdominal pain or  possible bloody stools).  All AEs will
be assessed by a study physician and referred for appropriate treatment.  The study
drug may be discontinued at any time per the study physician judgment for safety.   All
SAEs will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event.
Dosing and Administration
The drug will be administered orally, under supervision of the caregiver, 550 mg twice a
day, for 3 months.
Drug Acquisition and Accountability
<<<PAGE 16>>>
pg. 16
The drug, rifaximin, will be provided by the study and acquired from the manufacturer.
Compliance will be monitored at phone calls and accountability through pill counts at
the endpoint study visit.
Formulation, Packaging, Appearance and Labeling
Rifaximin will be packaged in bottles of 100 tablets of 550 mg. The product will be
dispensed under the supervision of the study clinician.
Product Storage and Stability
Rifaximin will be stored in the clinical study office in a double locked facility in
conditions suitable for its stability.
Preparation
No special measures are required to prepare the drug for oral administration.
Measures to Minimize Bias: Randomization and Blinding
This is an open label pilot study.  Objective tests and biomarkers are used to minimize
bias.
Study Intervention Compliance
The subject's caregiver will be asked to keep a log of rifaximin dosage and date and time
of administration. This will insure compliance and adherence to the study protocol. The
compliance log and pill count will be reviewed during the endpoint visit.
Concomitant Therapy
The subject may take concomitant medications that do not interact with rifaximin.
These medications will be recorded at baseline. Any new medications taken during the
study period will be recorded.
Rescue Medicine.  AEs will be treated as appropriate with rescue medications.
<<<PAGE 17>>>
pg. 17
Participant Discontinuation and Participant Discontinuation /
Withdrawal
Discontinuation of Study Intervention
Administration of rifaximin will be discontinued and the study will be halted if a subject
develops a severe hypersensitivity to rifaximin or if a subject develops a C. difficile
infectious diarrhea with complications or any other AE felt by the clinician to warrant
discontinuation.
Participant Discontinuation / Withdrawal from the Study
While subjects are encouraged to complete all study evaluations, they may withdraw
from the study at any time and for any reason. Every effort will be made to determine
why any subject withdraws from the study prematurely. This information will be
recorded. All subjects who withdraw from the study with an ongoing AE will be followed
until the event is resolved or deemed stable. If a subject withdraws prematurely, all data
normally collected at the 3 month Visit will be collected at the time of premature
discontinuation. Subjects who had to interrupt taking the study drug for any reason may
be asked to go back on drug if there are no contraindications. Subject participation may
be terminated prior to completing the study for any of the following reasons:
Adverse event
Protocol violation
Loss to follow up
Subject withdrew consent at own request
Other
A Case Report Form (CRF) page will capture the date and the specific underlying reason
for discontinuation of study intervention or participant discontinuation/withdrawal.
Study Assessment and Procedures
Efficacy Assessments
<<<PAGE 18>>>
pg. 18
Adverse Event Reporting
AE reporting will begin at the time of signing of the informed consent (Screening) and
will continue until discharge from the study (5 months after the first administration of
rifaximin).
Serious Adverse Event Reporting
The PI will notify the IRB of any SAE, whether deemed rifaximin related or not, that a
subject experiences during their participation in the study within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the event. Following the end of the subject's 3 month participation in the
study, the PI will report SAE's spontaneously if considered at least possibly related to
rifaximin.  SAE reporting will follow Duke IRB requirements.
Rifaximin Alzheimer’s Disease Study  Pro00093318
V1 V2             V3 V4/End
Procedures Screening Baseline
wk
1
wk
3
wk
5
wk
7
wk
9
wk
11
WK 12
3
months
WK 20
5
months
Early
Term
Consent x
Medical History x x             x   x
Concomitant Medications x x             x   x
Vitals x x             x   x
VeniPuncture x               x   x
Blood Tests x               x   x
Stool Sample   x             x  x
Physical Exam x               x   x
MMSE x               x   x
ADAS-COG-11   x             x   x
Study Medication Dispensation   x
Study Medication Accountability                 x   x
AE assesment xxxxxxxxxxx
Phone Assessment     x x x x x x   x
Subject compensation   x             x x x
OnCore Status update x                 x
Phone Screening
Bristol Stool Question   x             x   x
Unscheduled visit/labs may occur if warranted for safety based on clinical judgment.
<<<PAGE 19>>>
pg. 19
All SAE's will be followed until satisfactory resolution or until the site investigator deems
the event to be chronic or the participant is stable.
Reporting Events to Participants
Subjects and their caregivers will be informed about individual or aggregate AE's, SAE's
and study related results as per IRB guidelines.
Reporting of Pregnancy
NA. Subjects will not be of child bearing age.
Definition of Unanticipated Problems
Unanticipated problems in this study will be any AE's or SAE's not previously described
in other investigators' research with rifaximin or not listed on the package insert for
rifaximin.
Unanticipated Problem Reporting
Unanticipated problems will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours of its occurrence.
Reporting Unanticipated Problems to Participants
Unanticipated problems encountered during the study will be relayed to  the subject(s)
if relevant to the subject’s safety as deemed appropriate by the Duke IRB.
Supporting Documentation and Operational Considerations
Regulatory, Ethical and Study Oversight Considerations
Informed Consent Process
<<<PAGE 20>>>
pg. 20
Before each subject is enrolled in this study, written informed consent will be obtained
from the subject and/or legally acceptable representative (LAR) according to local IRB
requirements.
Abbreviations
AD   Alzheimer’s Disease
AE   Adverse Event
FDA   Food and Drug Administration
IRB   Institutional Review Board
LAR   Legally Acceptable Representative
PI   Principle Investigator
SAE   Serious Adverse Event
US   United States
References:
1. Seiler N. Is Ammonia a pathogenetic factor in Alzheimer’s Disease?
Neurochemical Res. 1993;18:235-245
2. De-Paula, V et al. Relevance of gutmicrobiota in cognition, behaviour and
Alzheimer’s disease. Pharmacological Research 2018;136:29-34.
3. Cattaneo A, et al. Association of brain amyloidosis with pro-inflammatory gut
bacterial taxa and peripheral inflammation markers in cognitively impaired
elderly. Neurobiology of Aging 2017;49:60-68.
4. Braniste V et al. The gut microbiota influences blood-brain barrier
permeability in mice. Sci Transl Med 2014;6:263
5. Holzer P et al. Neuropeptides and the microbiota-gut-brain axis. Adv Exp Med
Biol 817:195-219.
6. Bravo JA et al. Ingestion of Lactobacillus strain regulates emotional behaviour
and central GABA receptor expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve. PNAS
108:16050-16055.
7. Vogte NM et al. Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Rep.
2017;7:13537
8. Bosoi, CR et al. Identifying the direct effects of ammonia on the brain.
Metabolic Brain Disease 2009;24:95-102.
9. Miyata K et al. Congenital portal systemic encephalopathy misdiagnosed as
senile dementia. Intern Med 2009;48:321-4.
<<<PAGE 21>>>
pg. 21
10. Keiding, S et al. Hepatic encephalopathy in cirrhosis measured by positron
emission tomography. Hepatology 2006;43:42-50.
11. Hoyer, S et al. Ammonia is endogenously generated in the brain in the
presence of presumed and verified dementia of the Alzheimer type.
Neuroscience Letters 1990;117:358-362.
12. Le Prince, G et al. Glutamine synthetase (GS) expression is reduced in
senile dementia of the Alzheimer type. Neurochemical Research
1995;7:859-862.
13. Woodmansey EJ. Intestinal bacteria and aging. Journal of Applied
Microbiology 2007;102:1178-1186.
14. Andrieux C et al Metabolic characteristics of the faecal microlora in humans
from three age groups. Scand J Gastroenterol 2002;37:792-8.
15. Marchesini G et al. Synthesis of urea after a protein-rich meal in normal man
in relation to ageing. Ageing 1990;19:4-10.
16. Fisman M et al. Hyperammonemia in Alzheimer’s Disease. Am J Psychiatry
1985;142:71-73.
17. Hawkins RA. The blood brain barrier and glutamate. Am J Clin Nutr.
2009;90:867S-74S.
18. Erdo F et al. Age-associated physiological and pathological changes at the
blood-brain barrier: A review. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism
2017;37:4-24.
19. Montagne, A et al. Blood-Brain Barrier Breakdown in the Aging Human
Hippocampus. Neuron 2015;85:296-302.
20. Garcovich, M. Prevention and treatment of hepatic encephalopathy: Focusing
on gut microbiota. World J Gastroenterol 2012;18:6693-6700.
21. Kang DJ et al. Rifaximin exerts beneficial effects independent of its ability to
alter microbiota composition. Clinical and Translational Gastroenterology
2016;7:e187.
22. Sochocka M, et al. The gut microbiome alterations and inflammation-driven
pathogenesis of alzheimer’s disease – a critical review. Molecular
Neurobiology 2018; pp 1-11, published online.Bass, N et al. Rifaximin
treatment in hepatic encephalopathy. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1071-1081.
23. Mullen, K et al. Rifaximin is safe and well tolerated for long term
maintenance of remission from overt encephalopathy. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2014;12:1390-1397.
24. Mattson N et al.  Association of plasma neurofilament light With
neurodegeneration. JAMA Neurol. 2017;74(5):557-566
25. Rissin, D et al.  Single-molecule EISA detects serum proteins at
subfemtomolar concentrations.  Nature Biotechnology 28, 595–599 (2010)
<<<PAGE 22>>>
pg. 22
26. Dage JL et al.  Levels of tau protein in plasma are associated with cognitive
function in an elderly cohort.  Alzheimer's & Dementia, 12, 1226-1234, 2016
27. Janelidze S et al.  Plasma β-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease and vascular
disease.   Nature Scientific Reports, 6, 26801, 2016.
28. Package Insert, Rifaximin (Xifaxan, Salix Pharmaceuticals, Bridgewater, NJ)
<<<PAGE 23>>>
pg. 23
https://shared.salix.com/shared/pi/xifaxan550-pi.pdf